[HEBREW TRANSLATION] Here I was also to work in the world, because the water pipe and the road can no longer come up. And that's why you have that especially when you can't wait anyway, that they don't crawl away, that never throw down a bit more. Even later, he has no problem staying with us for a time when we say you're no longer good for cellar talk. That would be bad too. So. How long were you in Kiel? I was in Kiel until 1981, when I started my studies. But I kept going back to Kiel during the semester breaks and summer vacations. In other words, the company protected me by not letting me go, but actually giving me time off during the semester break. That was important for me at the time. I was employed in a defense district. That was one step. And then the company owner really wanted me and I came here to Munich with the documents. I also took another trip. Before the dignity. You know, in the fall of 2012, an SS man sat down in the Reich Chancellery of the Freimerei der Bürger. And followed up with a conversation. Was he afraid? Yes, he was. He said: "I don't want you to be in my face. He has a conversation that I was not only once more than normal in the meeting, but more than three school years or six years not so good in normality. But he doesn't have the conversation. He thought it was very genuine. I'm sure he also thought: "Where do I have to go? He then told me: "Yes, he wasn't actually SS, he was police. But he obviously hadn't worked as well as was expected of him during the evacuation of Jewish apartments in Strasbourg, so he wouldn't have been needed in the company. Whether that was the truth or whether it was just an attempt to offer himself something else or if he was no longer needed in the company. In any case, as we had already been slaughtered in Stalingrad and were nearing the end, it was an end that I couldn't accept. And then one day I said to this SS man: "I'm here, but I shouldn't actually be here. I should just be at the front now. That would probably be the normal thing to do, because of course I didn't laugh to myself at that moment, but I kept giving it to myself. And you know what? I can give you another thought. I can write it to you. The Führer's office has a request. The Führer's office has a request. He did that? No, he told me to write it. But that's only if you really, really nationalize the wording of this text. You've already done that once. I did that and then spent three or four days thinking about how to sign it. Heil Hitler or with a German book. In the meantime, these two letters were no longer quite the same, and the one who didn't have the latest difference and wasn't so much in favor of the other was generally then to write with German letters. It was clear to me that one should actually write Heil Hitler in newspaper letters. But I couldn't bring myself to do that at the time, so to speak. It was a request from me. So I probably signed it with such books and then I thought to myself: Yes. I didn't get an answer from them. But then, let's say, November, November, November, another request for me to appear before Rüsterung. And unfortunately just before that, every day when he was very good, no problems with armoring. The blood was not answered. But also in November or December, if you can look at it that way. Yes, we still have it there. A request to come to the muster, again. But then I wrote to them: "Yes, the muster was then. The documents must be with you. It also went via Kiel in a roundabout way, this one and that one, Stuttgart, until I got there, nothing more came afterwards. There was no more armor and no more conversation. So, now here. Ah yes, now comes another one: Eh, in the Jewish operations (slight background noise) they took away the awards from the Jews and (?). Mhm. Yes, uh, that could of course happen with the system and could take away my passport, my military service pass in and of itself... And then... Excuse me. Please. There are all these combat units where you can look for it. Mmm. If, we can record here now, I wrote after the attack on Kiel- Mhm. Eh, a little later, I wrote to, to, to, eh, the responsible office: "Need a new military ID." Because during the air raid, the military pass would have come on the basis of that, because I might have missed it. Although I had it. But I wanted to have a second one and in the event that one was taken, I still had the option. So I rushed to a visiting position. You get criminalized, yes, as they say. I then also got the second military service pass. Mhm. I have to go down here, that's a bit.......................... Here it is, wait a minute. Now. Here comes the second one. I only have this one in the back.......................... Uh-huh. Hmm. So I have a second one. I was then happy to dispose of the two military service passes and then put them together so that I had a military service pass where the political notification no longer stood up. Then only discharged for, eh, replacement military pass two, NZZV. NZZV meant "not to be used". I didn't know at the time that the term "unworthy of military service" stood behind the NZZV, yes, but we still have this pass. In Kiel it was actually also that, it was a psychosis, an outlandish psychosis, er, of saboteurs, spies and so on. I assume that this psychosis was bred up quite well by the Nazis and that people were found in the harbor basins in the morning, beaten and killed and then went to work. Mhm. And these were people who were somehow not satisfied with Nazism, according to the courts that you heard. Mhm. And I was of the opinion that I didn't want to go out of life like that, and if I did go out of life, then in the company of a teacher. Mhm. Yes? I asked my father to please try to induce a psychosis in me through his fighting officers who were still in the Wehrmacht. Mhm. And that also worked here via a small but subtle psychosis, so-called Ubu perfection. It always resulted in a twenty-four gram shot for everyone who was allowed to fear. (quiet background noise) Because someone doesn't try to talk, they walk away and they get hugged. She's no good any more. So, then deregistration from me. Call the registration office again. Nothing else special. Then I'm told that my military service pass has been lost. -that a new military service pass had arrived. Um, ah yes, another one. I also have a few sheets from Murmelschen, from 1945. He had been a passenger in-- Where else do we have it? (Clothes rustling) I also talked about air raids there. During an air raid, the air raid was in the twilight rank, in the year 2000. You can see a big hole there. (...) Memory starts to burn. And then I fall, because I liked being a homeowner, then I fall down these steep stairs and my mom (...), my brother was four, he could remember something about it. And then on Monday the following week it happened again. And a few days later, uh, the landlady told me I had to go to the NSDAP office, to the (...) And that was a creaking, brown rain tree- Mhm. -And rose from the ground.Yes, so even before we came to hold my Kaptur, because an air raid would have come here and he would question me in an award, uh, an honor. I recommend you to make me in that direction, they would only get harder. But open your mouth and I won't even have it done. But of course there's no, no... Another happening. Another event. It's just after eleven. Another event, which is also typical, was that it was dropped by the escape wave during the attacks. From the aliens, yes? To undermine, so to speak, the defenses of the entire population. These were, as a rule, not particularly good, good works, but they came down. It was strictly forbidden to pick them up, or if they were picked up, then as far as I was. One day I went down from the apartment to the university in the morning and it was all full of blood glue. So I picked up flyers, against the ban. And only then did I remember: My God, you're here on this slope where people can see you everywhere and where they know you're a prison. Did you pick up leaflets? No, you can't think. What are you doing now? I said: get reported by all the people who've seen it and all of them stop studying and maybe other things. And then there's only one option left. Now you have to document that you've handed it in. So I wrote a registered letter to the Police Headquarters, Enemy Propaganda Department, put them in and sent them off. This receipt, this posting slip, is still there. Nothing special, but it was a relief for me. Then a rich gift. Then another document, also interesting. I had to register, you always had to register when you moved house. I also sent in a police registration and that, or a diarrhea for the species, was sent with it and then got this letter back on a time document. With, where is here, here. Please send the personal details of the parents on the enclosed handout. It was quite clear that the guide was replaced, although this was not required for the police registration. In this respect, this is just an interesting contemporary document. So, then after this attack, where I deleted and then had an accident, I contacted the pension office after some time. The bureaucracy worked really well. Someone then reported the case. I don't know who, maybe you too, Mr. Edith. The party office, I don't know. Then you do welfare and care here according to the Personal Injury Ordinance. Now that a report of the facts has been received here, you suffered bodily injury from burns in the night of and so on during fire-fighting work. If it is assumed that in the meantime the burns have been stopped without a proper or containing cetera, you should not make any payments until the fifth or sixth Friday. That is assumed to be no body harms. So, that's actually what I have in documents. My brother has probably already told him that we will later flee to Switzerland, flee in the sixty-fourth. So, you know, what did you learn from the Second World War? I learned from the Second World War that the Reich taught us that the system is monitored, that morals, ethics, that it can't work at all. And that violence, the way it is worshipped and violent action, military or non-military, is - through the force of implementation, without me turning the design against it in general, then society is horribly ill and the path must lead to closure. Also for society itself. And from the indulgence I mean, I don't really remember afterwards, came back with the illusion of living in the illegal, came back with the illusion that a general sigh of relief was now taking place here. There was no question of breathing a sigh of relief. It was just a desire not to lose oneself and to stay greedy. No one was This is an exaggeration, but no tears were shed in the first phase, even though we had already heard about the crimes mentioned. Only the disadvantages that people suffered. What is your best memory from such a house? Well, yes, there are two euros. One, that's the one in the place, whoever it is, where I went to school, yes, where this girl took me in and I saw her there, totally, yes, completely loveless, not cared for. And we were of the opinion that we were being shot at by Mr. Ranzen and we didn't want to get anything. So it was that the information we had was so all-protective. And the second big shock for me was when he was down at the canal, we were already in the unit where they always dared in the village and the regimental headquarters was in a neighborhood, I don't know, 50 meters away from here. And there I was no longer sitting in the village, always going down as a dispatcher, communicating the queries or whatever, understanding the blood. And when I went there for the first time, they themselves, must be, is bent somewhere before. And after Stern, and the father I knitted everything to a bank pit, right? That was actually a Jewish, not yet far away winter. The flower there after. I did a service once, the one with Heimliche drove here and put it here. It was a secret freshness place. And that's when I got a few signs in my hand. Why don't you say a watch or something? When, I asked myself a little rather there. With the right wing of the German Army, the German Agricultural Air Force, this right wing then crossed the halfway point on the 10th Channel, the British unit that had landed there was encircled to the right and the nationality was moved. At this four-way turn at the 11th Channel, where you can see something further, that's how it is. And when I then, as I said, from the Swiss chain underneath, which I had at the time, I came here in Solingen. This advance to the canal at that time was by an SS unit, an SS unit. There were still English soldiers in the village. They didn't even know that this breakthrough had been so successful and that they had driven in. So they were completely surprised by this SS unit that drove in. And a shot was fired from the tower, which was an observation tower, narrow or something, and there was a jolt on the road. So that the SS sealed off this punishment for him, put together fighting, agile beings, the youngest was twelve years old, in the Elbe over 70 years old and was over 60 people who had not yet seen the sand curves in the beds. That would be all. That was the information that he gave me. The next shock. Below that we see that some vein, five eyes or something like that, as a, shall I say, as a limitation of flying modesty and of my voice of this brutal commonality, because that was really a steering of the world. And the last such shock was then the English doubt and to put the position. So are these events also felt to be bad for Germany? Orders actually, thank God. This army abides by certain international rules after the outbreak of war. An underage girl who knows she will be shot if she wants to be. This means that what is known as morality is also respected here and prohibits the army from becoming morally insensitive. I've seen this wave and I've seen that it's moral. You have. Various. Drawers, where I would actually have been possible. And then I did the Lord. That would have been the only way. What was your best action in the military? Did you write it nicely? Well, when you. Say a special act. Then I have to say that the one where we were decorated wasn't a particularly bad one. I held a position where I was able to keep an overview. So that wasn't my superstar, even if this position was important for the unit, yes, that the unit wasn't endangered even more. But it wasn't, it didn't require any personal commitment. And then in France, when the advance was still going on and after the stop at the Elba Canal, Germany also drove ahead, got behind the lines, got behind the enemy units. During my interviews I learned about homosexuality in the army. Many of my interviewees told me about it. What do you know about this topic? Did you also suspect it at the time? Asked yourself whether it made sense to continue fighting? No. You can tell me. At a certain point it was for me. In the army. Being in the army and fulfilling my military duties was actually a service for the family. Are you afraid of dying? Did you know back then when Germany had won? Would he have known? I don't think so, because in those early days, when I was still a soldier, I didn't realize that Germany was so successful. The perception has changed. Fifty was simply realistic at secondary school. And later, of course, from the time I came back, I also had conversations with the gentlemen, the Jewish gentlemen with all the gentlemen. But I assumed that there would be someone under our banner who belonged to the Germans, so to speak. And yet we are lucky that they did not end up with the Sodass order. You see, you were dreaming back then. Please dream. You were dreaming today. Dreaming about that time. Nothing at all about the events of the Third Reich. That I read or the lines. Perhaps I would like to say that I refused after the war. Had talked about that time until about ten years ago. Why did you wait so long? Today? It was. Not a profession. I didn't want any more. Getting stuck. A burden. It was. I repressed it. To protect myself. It was a burden. Thinking about it. Thinking about it. It's still stressful today. To think about it. And I am. To the end, so to speak, this denial did not get entertained. Because the city of Mülheim invited the former Jewish citizens who were still alive, who could still be mediated, and then there was a small note in the newspaper Anyone who still knows anything about the Jewish community of Mülheim, has photos or hears about 8 p.m. please get in touch. With a view to inviting these citizens everywhere next year. I then called the lady who was given as the address, can gladly contribute. I don't know her. A Mülheimer only moved here two or three years ago, but I could imagine that the old Mülheim people, who are from Mülheim, would be happy to contribute. To invade the old homeland, as we know today, and perhaps also to visit one or two people who were already... And that's why I see myself as a Jewish morning, because he can no longer talk about my time. Then it turned out that I was working in this preparation group and I did that and then I was forced to go to school and saw that I couldn't do it anymore. I did what I did in my experiences. I've been in schools where I've really seen what people are like. That's my old job after 2011, whether it was actually good for me, I don't know. Did you cry back then? No. You felt I had to be strong now? Being strong means saying I'm a good father. No, I wasn't good. Nowadays, do you have the beauty to admire other people? You can't say anything in general right now. But it's a long time here too. If someone says something because of me. But when I ask myself the same questions as my parents' generation, how did he act back then, what was it like? Today, everything still gets little remarks in turn, with which people try to document the fact that they don't have a single message to share. Perhaps that would be the best answer to the basic question. If I ask enough, 45 as the times develop here, I would simply be more pleased. Because I have a composed thought. But there he was no longer alone. Because you have tackled your Jewish past? Yes, definitely. I have much more joy for the Jewish side than for the sorrow. How? Please share. Do you consider yourself Jewish? You can't say that. It's just that the religious side of this world is much closer to me today than ever before. I've done a lot of work in that area. But I'm not so religious that I think it has to be documented in the form of images of God or any visible operations. But I think everything that our society, children, is a modern society, ethics and morals, is already in the Bible. The knowledge is there. So from my point of view, it was Catholic. Yes. But tonight you are Jewish. Faith? No, no. As long as I'm there. I'm clear now. I believe in a Lord in the afterlife. I believe that it is completely independent to have this idea for it. The best thing is not to have a concrete idea, as I believe in the origin, in the Lord himself. I am convinced that the Buddhists who believe in the Lord in a different form, or who believe in the Lord in a different form, believe in the one Lord just as much as we believe in the Lord of the Old Testament. And that these are such different forms. But of the forms themselves, they are in each form The is a bit complicated. From the Christianity produces, they are before that, from what Paul, who will have my form, the Catholic body or Christianity puts. That is something of the start could have asked if he was pure. But he didn't really want to. I didn't know that. So now it's on to other questions about the drug. But in the thirties, did you take a bath? To the world? No, no. Not to the world. The best thing to do is to ask again: "Since the fallerloch is in the media and they are not for us. And the second thing is, in this question: "You men in our unit, what kind of religion did you have? And also, what kind of... Did you feel like fighting? Well, the Israel units were both. That's absolutely right. Those were the catalysts. So Catholic, predominantly Catholic. Were they Darstadt Catalysts? Were the Feststadtkatalys? 100% Yes. And that they somehow came here from the villages and from the valleys, yes. If you became even closer to the Old Sea, then the catalyses are stronger. And like people, if you knew now that you had a hybrid, do you take, technically, those of The you had? No, individual not. No, special beliefs. Special beliefs, yes. Special beliefs. And did you really have hardly any technology? Under the Bavarians, the smoke was rich as an expression of, I'll call it, a tolerable willingness to get sick, yes, much more defensive than in general. But I have now protected them, they have another five, six, another five, six, seven years. At that moment, there was certainly nothing more to do than in the Wehrmacht unit. Did you have the Chamber of Commerce? No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, what was your legal ration to shoot at others? Do you sometimes feel like you follow people who could have helped you? So I was with my girlfriends and freedoms in the teacher from the year 2000. I was actually more from the year 2000. but in Poland? I was also a teacher in Poland. And I shot in that place, outside Lviv, at that spot with the anti-tank gun. I shot at a block of houses or a house where, although there was shooting, we didn't see a single person who had fired. It just saw and there come shots. That was very, very good for you that you were always in the back, especially you know what would have happened if you had run into us again in the intervention. That's what you said. In France, I did not decide, except at the one point where I came practically already child Nazi youth and concludes to a more misunderstood vehicle, I did not listen to me. I went into a house here and also concluded that it was a misunderstood vehicle. Yes. Of course, you have to realize that there was no point, it was actually just a defensive reaction to the gravel. And you asked yourself at the time, why should I stay? Why should I go on? No, no. No, no. Life was a matter of course, that we were in the world. Life itself can have its faults. The best reason is for me. You will forget yourself in perspectives as you chalk. I am not able to give a head definition. But it comes. Not easy at first, but once you have a lot of rules of psychology, so all plant, then you see that every person, every soldier who just wants to be a soldier who defends, he doesn't go at it either. And just says to us, I am a soldier for my fatherland, in any case, in defense of the whole world. Although it's also clear to me that everyone gets, then it's back and forth, so defense and other things. But he has almost perfectly adjusted that he gets into the soldier. So much so that he says: "I'm a soldier. You were a perfect soldier? Yes. You were a soldier?" that he's there for them and that he's going to make sure they're okay." And I always thought: "Yes, it would be nice if the parents got divorced or whatever. Then we'd all be together on a farm and then we'd be fed by nature and everything else would be superfluous." That was my childhood. Of course, I had a really great upbringing with our foster parents, who treated me very lovingly. They fed me and did all sorts of things. I can still remember my first picture of my mother. Instead of the drawing lessons that didn't normally exist at that time, she wrote a picture book. Every pupil could use it to create their own story. So I said, "Mom?" "We want to have a tree in our garden." "Then I'll draw you a tree," said my mother. And were you kind as children? My friendliness came from the fact that I really did have friends, but didn't want a family. So I was only ever able to have one-to-one conversations with the people I was allowed to meet. There were never several people to talk to at the same time. I find that exciting. What did you mean when you were an adult? I don't think anyone would have known what I was thinking about at the time. We live in the 21st century. What do you mean by that? Of course, of course. Everyone already knows what's going to happen. People need to know what happens when they die. That goes without saying. Yes, that goes without saying. But we haven't talked about death yet. All we ever talk about here is how people died in the year 2000 and what the other person says: "He had a good heat pot. He wanted a beer." And then I keep saying: "Will you please go to the pub?" Then they tell me about their friends from the war, that there's good food there or something else. But I never asked: "What did you want? What was your job?" because, of course, I was interested in everything. And were you religious with your parents as a child? I was very religious. As a little girl, my friend sometimes said to me: "Oh, you're going to be a mother." I thought that was good. He meant that when you grow up, you can have children. When I was born, I thought: Oh God, now I have to do something for my posterity. So that means you had bought lucky mushrooms? No, no, no, no, no, no, no, nine millionths.