[HEBREW TRANSLATION] But our commander reported that no one could get through here unseen. The British armament is so good, nobody can get through here. But two months later, the German naval command sent Bismarck and Britta off in the hope that they could get through the Atlantic unnoticed. Is that what happened in those two crosses? They stayed there and followed Britta all the way. And so in the aftermath, she was in blood? Yes, we made out two Atlantic ventures in the time of West. We were looking for ships somewhere in the great Atlantic. Once we came across one of them. There were twelve ships that we sank almost completely. There was no guard. And then our commander, my damper scored, there are a lot of people swimming here, shovels in the area. Please come and help yourselves, you people. But then we drove back to the west as quickly as possible and got to the west before anyone else could catch us. It was similar in the other case. There was this convoy, a military convoy, which had several cruisers, several destroyers and an aircraft carrier in the middle of the convoy, but the aircraft carrier was fully loaded with planes, couldn't take off any planes. And we then headed west as fast as we could when it was highest and it was quite heavy weather so the other British ships didn't get too fast. And then, after this venture, she was in the submarine, yes? Then it was three years submarine. Two. And where were you with the submarines? Mostly on the Canadian coast. Our missions usually lasted, I had a larger submarine, four months. We were equipped for four months, five months without supplies, there and back. And one time I was on the Canadian coast off Alifons. The second time we came into the Saint Lorenzburg and waited for ships there. Just before Quebec. Neither side was. But no ships came. But one day a destroyer came and caught us. Then you had a snorkel? Yes. In '43? '44. And how many ships did you sink? Well, actually just this one big convoy, which was a convoy of twelve ships. And with the submarine, how many? Less than that. Really? Once I sank a collector off Halifax, a small ship. But otherwise I didn't have many episodes. I enlisted a convoy on the way back from St. Lawrence, but didn't get to finish it. So where were you at the end of the war? I had a longer time, in the winter of '44, '45 and it was then April 30, I think, before we went on operations in Bergen. You can imagine I had the letter operations area of New York Harbor. On April 30, '45, at a time when Berlin had fallen, Mittlandshof, all of Germany was occupied except for Glenzdruck, I get an operation order for New York Harbor. I've never actually done anything that crazy before. Did you follow the order? Of course we left and nine days or four or five days later we were north of England, north of Scotland, and that's when we got the order to come to England. And you had enough gasoline and diesel? Yes. In '45? Yes. The basic question is correct. So, what would you say, Mr. Schopold, what did you learn from the Second World War? Back then, we fought and didn't think much about it, apart from the fact that even then we didn't believe in an end goal, that we didn't really want to know about the Nazis and were thinking, how can we get rid of the Nazis? How can we get rid of the Nazis? And after winning the war, that would have been even more impossible. We hadn't thought about it at the time, but today I would have to say that if the third war had been won, it would probably no longer be possible to get rid of them. As soon as you knew about the Holocaust, you knew nothing. Do you have a smell? Nothing. And a relative. How many siblings did your mother have? One brother was in the First World War and one sister. And the sister has the problems she no longer has. Had. Had you felt that perhaps that would be difficult for her in the future? Being against your Jewish ancestry? No, that had been removed by the Nazis. So they had been given a certificate. A certificate that they issued. From whom? Reich Security. Capital. That was Kaiser, wasn't it? Or from the Second World War. You what on the Wehrmacht. So, if you knew anything about the Holocaust? After the war. But when am. I arrived in England as a prisoner of war, handed over my boat in London derry. The Navy treated us very, very decently and fairly. And then we had to vacate the ship. It was very military. There was the commander-in-chief of the U-boat defense, an English vice admiral. He received us. We reported into the boats in military fashion, as is customary among military personnel. Then a day later we had to leave the submarine, arrived at a prisoner of war camp and then the tone suddenly changed. We still traveled to London in a sleeping car, but then we came to a camp in London. Half of our luggage was taken away from us and then there was a big board with pictures, photographs and letters. And there was an English captain, an English major standing in front of it. I had a white cap, a commander's cap, the U-boats were always a matt white cap. He must have picked me out and said, you bastard, what do you think of these pictures? I said, I'm sorry, I'm sorry. We'll deal with you pig. And then came a special suspicion, I was brought before a kind of court and then questions were first asked about my submarine, about the torpedoes. I had handed over the boat. The British had the boat, I was able to answer them well. And then we asked them what they had to say about the pictures they had seen. I said that National Socialism was over. I am German. And then the man, the chairman of the court, so to speak, behind me stood two soldiers with their bayonets cocked. We'll give it to you pig. Then he put on his gloves so that I wouldn't get dirty on you pig and gave me growth. How did you feel? I can't describe it. Loaded with rage. That was my first contact with England. They said these people, watch out, my grandfather was Jewish. No, no, no. I never mentioned it again. And these people in the U Boat, these people knew that they. It was no longer an issue. Were they afraid that people would find out or. Nope, nope. I could have said that. So, what was your worst memory? That scene was probably my worst memory. But I have to say that after this runaway, other comrades of mine were similarly bad Americans when they first arrived in England after the surrender, that the treatment after that was much better. We stayed in England for three years, because the release from English captivity, prisoner of war after the date of captivity began and we were the last to stay in England for three years. But it took me a long, long time, because in this incident with the English, I had actually been in England several times, but it took me a long time before I set foot on English soil again for the first time. So when had they known that the war was over for Germany? But that they weren't at war. So of course I think the situation was worse at the time. I thought to myself today that with America's entry into the war and the improbable extremes behind it, a war was no longer winnable once America entered the war. On the other hand, we ourselves knew that a war on two fronts would not make Jens and us feel comfortable. The German force management would be overstretched. So we said right at the start of the causal process that it couldn't go well. But we were still happy to say soldier. And what if you have to? Did you ever think I should defect? Yes, I had problems because I was with so-called mongrels second grass, behind the Juros. I never felt like a half-breed. Yes, never felt, but that's what people in the government have said. I wanted to tell you, there you had.... I did. Did not think that it was no longer my duty to do and defend the fatherland. That was for us the directors and the fall stand says. So, what? Can you... Are you ready? Yes, we actually have to do something. We need to get a lot of time off. Okay. So, did you ever dream during this time? Are you trotting these days? No, no. That's not an issue. That's not an issue. That's what I'm writing here. I feel like a German naval officer. I feel German, but I have a good past, which actually ended for me in 1840. No memory. Back then, did you find yourself embarrassed about your Jewish ancestry? Did you think, I wish my grandfather wasn't Jewish and so on? You can't think that. You can also say that the past doesn't really matter. I didn't think that, but of course I was one of the bad guys who had to leave the navy. Do you consider yourself somewhere now? I see the whole thing as an excess of so-called Aryan laws in America. An absurdity of healthcare. Have you ever thought of yourself as a Jew? Never. How did you feel when suddenly - like we just said, you're like a 25% Jew against the laws? No, he just thought that. He has administrative jobs in Germany. And did you talk to your parents about what we should do, what the opinion here is so on? Yes, of course, we always spoke freely with my parents at home and were anything but Nazis and hoped that fate might be closer to us and free us from the Nazis again one day. I think I mentioned earlier that we always called them a miller at home. Were you afraid of the cities when you were a soldier? You don't think so. Even as a watch you are, because the chance of survival wasn't that great. But I got married in January 1944 and we agreed with my wife that when I came back in May, we'd get married properly, have a party and so on. Then we'll go on our honeymoon. But right now we're waiting to get all the formalities done first. But nobody thought that I might not come back. Never. Never in secret. Do you feel guilty yourself for what you did during the war, after the war? I can't feel guilty that I had to endure the thread procedure. I only really realized that we had a terribly evil government. Later. But the war wasn't a war that was only fought over the youth issue or because of the youth issue, it was a completely different dimension. The war was fought between European powers, where power and the economic situation within the international community were at stake, where a certain revision of the Versailles treaties was at stake. But that's what I fought for and that's what I stood up for. I can't play a role in that today. Did you ever read a fight back then? No. No. You knew roughly what it said, but it was far too thick a book and nobody wanted to read it. And has anyone in your family voted in 30 years? Voted? Yes, voted. We've never not voted for a national outfit. With the Anschluss, with Austria. We thought that was right. Because the Austrians are Germans just like us. Like the Bavarians or the Würzbergers, but also the Austrians, Germans by nature and nothing else. Mhm. And that was now a construction, this Austria, which was made in this form in the nineteen-eighteen hundreds. Mhm. And when I look back now, I think it's actually a pity that the Austro-Hungarian monarchy, like the empire, was broken up at the time. Then we wouldn't have the difficulties in the Balkans today. Mhm. So. How did you feel about the Sudetenland? Right, too? Hitler went too far there. Mhm. He already went too far with the Sudetenland. Mhm. Yes, they wanted to come. Yes? Mhm. He went too far with that and later with the Protectorate we would be more We could understand all that. Two more questions. How would you describe the perfect or good soldiers? They did what they could for their country. Mhm. And were you a good perfect soldier? I can't judge. Well, and then one, one, one, last question. Your mother, did she ever hear ah commandment, what happened to the Jews and then ah, yes, raucht? And if so, did they have any problems that they were a soldier? No, no. Thank you. Are you part Jewish? No, no, no. My father was a baptized Jew. Mhm. My mother was Christian and was never Jewish. Connected in any way. So, when you were young, did you have any contact with Jewish culture or anyone? None at all. Ah My family was fully assimilated. My father was exchanged and served in the imperial army up to the rank of cavalry captain. He was passionate about all the military exercises. Mhm. He was a cavalry captain in the First World War, he was, he actually fought. Mhm. And ah, so he felt very German national and in my parents' house they didn't hide the fact that our family had Jewish origins, but there was no longer any connection to Judaism. So, what will you say? What kind of attitude did your father have towards Jews in the Jewish community? And so on. Well, I can't tell you that, because he died when I was not yet six years old. And at that age you don't want to deal with things like that. You can't know what the difference is, the religious difference between a Jew, a Catholic and a Protestant. So, did you have much contact with your Jewish relatives from your father? I had a lot of contact with my relatives, but they were just as animated as my father, the whole generation was ah and they all had no contact with Judaism. So, your grandmother, Jewish grandmother and grandfather, they didn't talk about the Jews and Jewish culture? My grandmother, my grandfather died in nineteen eighty-one, my grandmother died in nineteen twenty-one. I was two years old then. And no connection? Yes. (crosstalk 00:03:42) And the relatives, my father's fathers and he also has a sister and a brother, they were all baptized and ah had no connection to the Jews. Like that. That was the typical German, the typical German family of Jewish origin, which ah my father was a banker. The banking house was founded in Mannheim in seventeen hundred and eighty-nine and achieved a certain importance there. And the family was always very wealthy. And that led to the generation born in the second half of the nineteenth century completely turning their backs on Judaism and basically wanting nothing more to do with it. This corresponded to bourgeois society in the German Empire, which was very much characterized by the militarism of Wilhelm II, and all established Jews strove to gain a social position there. And that was only possible if you could renounce Judaism. Mmm. That's interesting. So when they were young, they had problems because they had a, they had a Jewish father? That was never a problem for me at all. I always knew that. But it was the same for me, he could have been Catholic or anything else. So that wasn't, wasn't, wasn't a problem. Ha. So, little- (crosstalk 00:04:53) So, in Mannheim, they didn't have a problem with the Jews. Mhm. There were Jews, but they were citizens just like everyone else. Mhm. And of course there were no Eastern Jews in Mannheim. There were actually only Jews in Mannheim who had lived in Mannheim for generations. Mhm. And ah those, of course, only had connections and social contacts with Jews who lived on roughly the same ah social level. And so there weren't the biggest ah problems. So, when they were born, a rabbi had ah marked their birth, but they were circumcised? No, no, no, no, no, no. That was a Protestant household.I was baptized, uh, by a Protestant pastor, right after they were born. Hm. So nineteen thirty-three, when Mr. Nauniemar came, uh, were you afraid? No, not immediately, not immediately. But that developed naturally. Because at first you were ostracized at school and, and, uh, because my family was known to be Jewish - in Mannheim. Of course, everyone knew that the Baugräfsohn Emser family were Jews. And, uh, then, uh, of course there was a certain ostracism at school. And, uh, my father would have died, as I had already said. As a result, my mother moved with us from Mannheim to Munich in nineteen thirty-four. Because there the name Hohenemser was not associated with Jews. And I then went to school in Munich. But of course it was known at school that I wasn't a first-degree student because I was in the middle and couldn't get into DJJ or JUV and had very little air. But of course it was known to the teachers, and also to my classmates. And that of course, uh, led to certain problems. Mhm. And, uh, there were, uh, classmates who were particularly friendly to me, who, uh, also came from homes with liberal attitudes. And of course there were also classmates who had positions like the DJJ and who stood out in particular because they weren't treated because of the first degree in 1960. Hmm. So when, when, uh, when you, uh, moved to Munich thirty-four. Thirty-four? Yes. And how did you feel when you made that move? Oh, that was... Munich was a very pleasant city and, and, uh, as a young person, you're curious about a new environment. Mhm. And, uh, I actually, uh, very much welcomed that. So, you didn't feel anything, any danger? Danger? Yes, a danger. No, no, no. There was no real danger back then. Back then, the half-breed had just been left in the ditch. It hadn't even happened to the Jews yet. Until nineteen thirty-eight, until Kristallnacht, nothing happened to Jews who didn't somehow stand out politically or who, uh, held special positions until Kristallnacht. I later lived in Berlin. I lived in a sublet on November 9, nineteen hundred and thirty-eight, with a purely Jewish family. They were Romanian Jews, their name was Finkelstein. And they lived unchallenged in Berlin. And, uh, yes, but of course, they had these facilities. On the benches it said, well, uh, "Not for Jews" or some such stories, but they personally didn't miss it. And after Kristallnacht, November 9, nineteen thirty-eight, they immediately emigrated to England, which they were able to do because they had a son. So they were Romanians and he was an English soldier in the First World War. And then the English immediately, uh, gave him a home country status and they were-- He was smart enough. He said: "So, now history has changed." But until then, Jews could still live relatively unchallenged in Germany. Hm. So, after the Nuremberg Laws, uh, un-thirty you had with your, uh, brother. You had three brothers? One brother and two sisters. Have you spoken to your siblings and also your mother? What should we do? Now, we are so-called first-degree half-breeds. Were you, were you afraid? We weren't afraid, we weren't worried. No fear. It's, uh... There was once the idea of me coming to a boarding school in Switzerland, but that wasn't done after all. But of course they did, uh, consider it. But my brother, for example, he did his Abitur in Mannheim in 1934, four years older than me, and he stayed in Munich and was able to study there. Hmm. He studied at Munich University - no, that wasn't the case for me. Um... My brother studied at Munich University and also did his doctorate there. That was still possible. Without a problem? That went without a problem, yes. Hm. So, after Kristallnacht- After Kristallnacht, of course, the situation of the Jews changed dramatically. And, uh, but not the Jewish refugees. Hm. So, what kind of idea did you have of your future after thirty-eight? Actually, you always, you were always of the opinion that the Nazi regime there would fall. You always, uh, you always believed that it would somehow come to an end at some point. They didn't exactly believe that it would happen as a result of a war on this scale. But it was believed that political influences from abroad would bring production at home and the National Socialist Union Bank to an end. Hm. So, what kind of attitude did your mother and siblings have towards Hitler? Shift negative. Negative? Yes, yes. Did you vote back then? Voted? Yes. No, I wasn't a leader yet - so, with the Anschluss with Austria? Yes, of course. Too young too? Yes, of course. Yes, yes. And your mother, certainly not. But certainly not National Socialist. And your comrades, your pupils. Yes. Ahhh What kind of opinion did they have? Yes, some of them were staunch National Socialists, ahhh the ones who were in the youth and who were total leaders or whatever they were called. And there were others who were emphatically not Nazis and kept away from everyone. Mhm Just like the one who came to power and held on to his power in the thirties. Did you not understand? Didn't I understand that like you, that Hitler had held on to his power yes yes and also ahhh how did he come to power? Well, these are historical facts, who came to power. Aaaa Here you can have a historical college. But if you talked to your comrades about it. Yes, yes, ahhh but he got about ninety-nine percent of the population back in the thirties. How could that happen when so many people. What is their opinion? The majority were in favor of Hitler. They thought it was daring. He built autobahns and people got jobs again and the economy picked up again and national consciousness was strengthened. And that was entirely in the interests of the Germans, including Germans who later turned their backs on National Socialism. So a nationalism in the sense of the German People's Party, or even if you go further to the right, or this direction, is shared by a great many Germans, especially among civil servants and the upper middle classes. There was certainly a view that this was good and right. The Treaty of Versailles was described in the same way as Hitler's treaty, and it was felt that Germany had been unjustly humiliated too much after the First World War, so people thought it was great that things were now looking up again. Hindenburg was seen as a former field marshal and Reich president, which people thought was fabulous, a kind of substitute for an emperor, and German officials had such attitudes. It was only when Hitler began to persecute the Jews, even after the Röhm affair, when he used such murderous means to hold on to power, that these circles began to close in on each other. You also had the autobahn back then and the things that happened in Germany, unemployment was gone. Did you think that was good? I have to say, I didn't actually have any real restrictions in my journalism contract at the time. I was fourteen years old when Hitler came to power and you didn't think much about things like that. So who and how did you get into the Dämmer? Yes, I went to Berlin after the Intuiturenachttreffen in Munich in nineteen thirty-seven and completed my commercial apprenticeship there. I finished this commercial apprenticeship in nineteen thirty-nine and then started studying economics at the business school in Berlin. That was still possible back then. Mhm And then I was drafted in November thirty-nine, shortly after the outbreak of the war, just like the year before. I was thirty-nine at the time? Thirty-nine, I was twenty years old. And what month? I was dressed in November. In thirty-nine? Thirty-nine in November. That was after the coal effect? That was after the coal strike, yes. And I was drafted and went to Potsdam for training in an existing artillery regiment. Back then, the horses still pulled the cannons. Mhm And I learned to ride there. I really liked that. After two or three months of training, I was transferred to the Eichel with this artillery regiment and when the French parade broke out, we marched through the whole of France. However, we were only as far as the Än, that was the first, you know, where the Än is, behind the north of France. Until then we were still in the front line. But then, because we had horses and were on horseback, it became more of a motorized battle and the tanks and the motorized units drove away from us and we were practically a stage with our horses and drove behind them. So after the battle at the Aen and the crossing over the Aen, we had no more contact. And then we went south and when France surrendered we were in France, in Jura, and stayed there for a while. And then the regiment was transferred to Poland and split up there. The old unit stayed in Poland and I joined the replacement unit, which was split up to Frankfurt an der Oder. We were replenished there and then trained new soldiers. And before this unit left Frankfurt an der Oder, I ended up there in December nineteen forty. Hmm. And, uh, was-- Who did that and what ha-, what did you, uh, realize at the time why you were discharged? (crosstalk 00:02:06) Yes. I did that. I often got leave from Frankfurt an der Oder to Berlin and, uh, I knew a lieutenant colonel in Berlin, uh, who had a, a substitute, uh, there was-- I don't remember exactly what it was called. There were commands that only dealt with, with the spare parts in Berlin, (...). And one day he told me that there was a Führer decree that all first-degree half-breeds had to be released. And he said: "You have to be released." And I said: "No, that's fabulous", and I went back to my unit in Frankfurt an der Oder and went to my, er, to my battery commander and said: "I'm a first-degree half-breed and you have to discharge me." And he was outraged. Because I was in the office and this, uh, this, uh, captain used to be what we called a twelve-year-old. So in the, in the Reichswehr, that was a long-serving person who had signed up for twelve years. And they were then, generally they were then discharged as, as a sergeant major, they didn't become officers. Mhm. And these people were then drafted when the war broke out and were immediately promoted to officers. And this one was, uh, a registrar in Neukölln in Berlin. Mhm. After he had completed his twelve years of service, he was then reactivated and became, uh, chief of an artillery battery as a first lieutenant. Mhm. And he was a very, uh, narrow-minded person and, uh, he thought it was outrageous that his Aryan instinct hadn't shown him earlier that there was a first-degree half-breed in his unit and that he had taken him onto the desk, where I had a certain amount of trust. And that outraged him so much that he tried to pin a, uh, court martial on me. In any case, he immediately took my cap and belt, because, uh, a soldier can't cross the street without a cap and belt. In other words, they practically grounded me, did a locker examination on me to see if I had any, uh, documents, uh, or anything else, in front of the whole crew, and, uh, said he wanted to, he wanted to court-martial me. And, uh, I had-- I had, uh, I was also a temporary clerk in our department. That's the superior military unit. And this regiment, that was the artillery regiment twenty-three in Potsdam, has a long aristocratic tradition. And, uh, this, uh, this regiment had, had outstanding horsemen and, uh, had, uh, in Potsdam, at that time there were still hunting races in Karlshorst. And that's where the horses and the officers of this regiment played a major role. And that's where I got to know the gentlemen who worked in the department. And the adjutant was a Baron von Bangenheim, an extremely likeable man. Mhm. And then I went across the yard without my paddock and cap, uh, to the department and went to this, uh, Lieutenant von Bangenheim and told him the story. And he said: "Uh, don't worry, I'll see to it that you march off to your replacement division immediately." And then the first lieutenant, who of course hadn't made a mom in front of, er, the whole squad, didn't want to move back. So he woke me up at five o'clock in the morning, gave me my discharge papers and without being able to talk to any of my comrades again, I had to leave during the night and went to Berlin and was discharged there. And when I was discharged-- there was a, there was a captain in charge and, uh, when he gave me my discharge papers, he said: "Um, my name is Kaufmann. I'm from Frankfurt. I know your family. And I just want to tell you that the lieutenant of your battery wrote in your discharge papers that you had all the bad qualities of the Jewish race and were a devious person." He says: "Of course I didn't write that in your papers now, but I just wanted to tell you that you'll get it, that they still want revenge. But they didn't succeed. I was then dismissed and, uh, went, uh, back to Munich and, uh, my father was merged with Rheinische Kreditbank in 1919. Rheinische Kreditbank was then merged with Deutsche Bank and one of my father's colleagues on the board was still a director of Deutsche Bank in Mannheim at the time. And in this position he had a lot of important appearances, you could say. Including at Brown Boveri. And he then, uh, transferred me to Brown Boveri in Vienna, so I was-- and, and so of course there was an important armaments company. And I was then in a commercial job, uh, I became NZV for organization dead or all these organizations, I became, I was NZV and I went to Vienna and, uh, of course nobody there knew my name either and, and was relatively unmolested and nobody in the company did either, although of course they were surprised that he was a young man, uh, working. And we certainly suspected it, but it wasn't talked about. But of course I didn't have a position either, as I was, interestingly enough, a salary clerk. I see. That was of course, that was all that was possible. Mhm. And, uh, I very quickly got an interesting circle of acquaintances in Vienna. Uh, because, uh, it was of course the case that whoever went for a walk in Vienna was a young man - Mhm. Everyone immediately suspected, well, something must be wrong. And there were a lot of half-breeds in Vienna, because the Viennese aristocracy was very strongly mixed with Jews. Hm. And in Vienna in the pre-war period, it was actually quite common for aristocrats, especially if they were too wealthy, to marry into rich Jewish families, and that happened on a large scale. And, uh, so there were many, many aristocratic mixtures. And one day I was on Kärntnerstrasse, you say, I'm Protestant, but in Vienna everyone is Catholic and they go to mass every Sunday at St. Stephen's Cathedral. Mass is over at twelve o'clock and after twelve o'clock it was customary for people to stroll along Kärntnerstraße. Mhm. And, uh, the better society, the ones who strolled along Kärntnerstraße between the opera and St. Stephen's Cathedral - and one day a young man approached me and, uh, said he'd seen me a few times and asked who I was. And then we got talking. Mhm. And that was also a Jewish half-breed. And he was the son of Alma Zeitler. Alma Zeitler was one of the most famous Ufa actresses at the time. Alma Zeitler was married to a Jewish director called (?Eitmit) and he was, uh, when the Nazis in, in Austria, the ones who annexed Austria, he emigrated to England. Mhm. And she was unchallenged-(heavy breathing)