[HEBREW TRANSLATION] Imagine one thing, when we joined the troops, the armies, the corps. I want to say, for example, that we were all assigned to what was called our own flying squadron. We visited all the corps and all the armies. If something special had to be decided somewhere, then it was all good morning or the evening before and we would fly there in the morning. Then I got there, for example in front of an army stand, and there was General Speidel, whom I had never seen before. He spoke to me like an old friend. He knew everything about me. He knew everything, he'd been away until now. Tresko copied a very close boy to Manstein's side. Did you have... Sorry, I would call it that. Did you try, with Manstein, to convince him about the plot against Hitler? Did you say at the time: "You must, Tresko, you must start helping, Field Marshal? No, I saw my task as doing my job properly. Correct and reliable as I could really be. And that was a natural progression. But with the dissociation? No, I don't think so. I don't think so. A young first lieutenant who was a reserve, to an abbot, that was not possible for me. But he was... He was a bit of a father-son relationship. But was he your friend? Yes and no. No, no. Henning Treskow had prepared me for things. He said: "Manstein, he won't back down from the conflict. One of your tasks is to confront him, to be relentless. Where you think you can choose the week for moral or ethical reasons. And that you consciously balance and I send out every hardwood that you have to balance between extreme correctness. She has to have that in front of her very intelligently. But you have to have the confidence that he's going to put in you right. But this also means that you tell him your opinion. That doesn't deviate from your opinion, that doesn't impress you with all kinds of high office. In future, you will almost only have to deal with generals. So that's your working group now, as I say. Don't do the railroad any more good. It's prepared. And then Henrik says to me: "But I don't know anything else either. He's a brilliant man, a great strategist, full of wit, full of ideas, full of ideas. He really is a terrible sheep-sleuth. Manstein, that's the battle player, that's the Fritz player who likes to play null games. He would have been like that, if I were still saying that. The one who took the most tricks lost, the one who took the fewest won. That was the name of Manstein. He was an amazing character. He was funny. I'm having a brainwave right now. Did you talk to Manstein about the Holocaust? I knew about the Holocaust - oh, the Auschwitz. Did you talk to him about Auschwitz? I talked to Manstein... One day I was given the task of writing a letter to General-Uhr-Kreck. A private letter. He called me into his room and said: "I'll take this letter. He was just about to seal the letter. He took his signet ring off his finger, lit his candle and made the letter. Which he did very, very rarely. And earned a letter to Mr. Treskow. Seal seam on top, candle, rice. When he had finished, he said: "This is a letter to Colonel General Beck. And you will deliver it to Berlin, but you will not visit Colonel General Beck, you will not enter his house and you will not make any arrangements with him. You will hand the letter to a trustworthy person in Berlin, who will personally hand over a Generalostek to you unsealed. You know many Berliners, make me a suggestion, whom you would like to suggest. I didn't have to think about it for long. Just said spontaneously: "Colonel Oster. They say: "I recognize you here. Then I say: "I know you very well. I'm friends with your son Achim. We did the Polish campaign together. I was also a country doctor in the Jäger division. Achim was adjutant to the 1st Major inside. We did the France campaign together. I was adjudant in the meantime because I was somehow in favor of it. There was also a Landdoktor in the Jägerabteilung. We always had something to do almost every day. We became friends. We knew each other from before the war. We invited each other out, went out once and we went through it. And Heinrich came to the field a lot. That was a great feeling. I'm the third in the cloverleaf, so to speak, Georg Oster, Zara, you are. Got that? You're meeting us together, yes, says my mother. She and her wife are members of the Protestant People's Party. Where she 25. Was the letter about the Halakas? That was... No, no, no. That was the letter I had to deliver. No, I still, still, still have to say something about it. I took the letter to myself - Von Manstein. I didn't know what it said. But of course I was... I didn't even know as a child that Colonel General Beck was there. I didn't know that. Mmm. Everyone in Berlin who was interested in that sort of thing knew that. Anyone interested in politics and they knew that. The older officers, who I didn't know, had a right to know. I didn't know that. I knew it was a well-known letter. It was the only letter I've ever had to deliver with such a side rash. I did... When I was sitting in my room again, I was room, I was, I was room commander, the Küsterl asked me, "Where's all the stupid?" If you come to Berlin now and Colonel Oster is also spießbreit and so on, then you'll realize. So I go back in to see the field marshal, the general field marshal, and I have another question. Because Colonel Oster can't, he tells me, give me an absolutely self-indulgent send-off because he knows how important he is. Uh, would I have to go by my middle name, my reserve name, if I want to talk here. What should I call you first? I'll make a suggestion: "Admiral Kanares." I introduce myself and say: "Do you know the colonel?" "No," I told him, "Mr. Field Marshal, but I'd like to get to know him. I've heard so much about him and it would be great fun to meet Admiral Kanares in person." And I sometimes thought, all right, agreed. Agreed. With these two orders, the system is loose. Either Oster will be there or Kanares, one of them will be here. And so I drove through the night to Berlin. And on the morning of the next day, there was a notice on our door. It said "Landwirt Kanares", for example. I thought to myself: "What's going to happen today?" And if it wasn't even "Oberst", it was "Oberst Oster". Then I brought it up and ran to the room. Oster's secretary said to me: "Yes, the colonel is with the admiral at the moment. He needs to wash him here, please, and so on and so forth." I said: "That's not right. If I'm good, the admiral will say the same thing." So I went and asked him to tell me where I could find Admiral Kanares. He was on the same floor, the same floor. Colonel Oster had his room at the back in the courtyard and Admiral Kanares had his room at the front facing the Landwehr Canal. So I ended up in Admiral Kanares' anteroom. And I don't think I can quite hear, as I said, I thought, that's not true. Then we hear out there in the room to the left, in the room to the left of the room I was in before, listening to the lecture. I can hear someone raging. A male voice was almost shouting. I say, "What's going on?" They shout: "The admiral, the admiral." I startle. (voiceless) Yes, but it was like that, quite unusual. I thought: "My God, does he have to shout? Because that's probably the padded door." Rooms like this are usually upholstered in leather. Mmm. It wasn't that one. It wasn't this door. It suddenly opened and Colonel Oster stood in front of me. Likewise, about seventy, eighty. "Strase, where are you from?" "From Field Marshal von Manstein." "Come in, come in, come in." I was already sitting, Admiral Kanares was already standing. He stood up and gave me the back in a terribly nice way. I thought: "That's it, that's what he means. Then that's what he means." He has an eye that I couldn't forget. A bright, cheerful eye. He's smiling, cheerful, smiling, breathing in front. It was unusual that he breathed deeply to reassure Colonel Oster. "Have a seat, get into the beer. What are you bringing here?" "A letter." "A letter?" I say. "Isn't that true?" "No." "Doesn't the addressee even arrive later, to Colonel Beck." "Yes, we don't understand." "He did." "He must have been pleased that we came from Manstein." "Well, that's interesting." "The addressee from Manstein comes from here to Colonel Beck." "But at most, what--" "Yes," I looked astonished. "What does the letter say?" "No idea, I don't know either." "But I have orders to deliver it, but not to hand it over personally. I have ordered the field marshal to replace the order from him not to enter his house with me when I come to Berlin." That was in 2009, when I arrived. "Without actually meeting me in a third place, just finding a random intermediary to deliver the letter." And that's when I took the liberty of presenting myself to Colonel Oster. And the field marshal immediately agreed. And I said: "I have the Admiral, who is also 30 years old." I also had the owl given to me by Westmacher or asked, no, I must have a second person, it could be that 2000 and thirty I can no longer read that. Was looking for so much mood. Will the feeling, I said, I said, and it was fun and said, so I want a karate squad, the war losers section. That's when the bowl-end Jo laughed and I said, "I think that's good". "Cheers, congratulations. You're the first lucky man, I'm the second lucky man." That was Canary Islands. So. Did Manstein talk about... Did you talk to Manstein about Auschwitz? Because you talked about Auschwitz... That's coming. He said it's coming now. That's how this morning began. Mhm. Then tomorrow was, this evening man had been scheduled in camera. Mhm. And where is the good before? And drinks the blood in the guilt of who did it himself. So he sat down at his desk and looked for something on the floor. And there he screwed very loudly. I don't know if I can write this. I don't know if I can write that. It was a bit unusual to come in there and listen in. I mean, if I kill the order, then I would say more of them both read it. But one of them will have read it. It has an answer that he uses so much on his side area, on his paper. I said, "Take a look at this. That's good." He pulled across the desk to me what was obviously a routine, quarterly or monthly light, with wealth certainty about the extermination of Jews in the world. And where was humanity? In the East. That was the Einsatzgruppe, I realize. Yes, Rainer Mochten. They reported to a number of offices. I don't know if there were 100,000 of them. If I'm there too much. When I see Noch leafing through that, what do I know, ten, twenty pages or fifty or something. I just know that we were flipping through like that, it was meticulously neatly written. It was the same safety book at the top of the pot and it was the report of the engine so it was described in depth, flawlessly, the columns, the generations of Jews, the districts in the East. Texts brought, texts brought. Another hundred thousand questions. A hundred thousand. Only they are women, they are children, they are old men, they are boys, head straightened. That is not possible. That was the first concrete thing I... It's the first time I've ever seen anything like it. And friends thought it was something you didn't have anymore. It was really sad, of course, because I had half a lecture and then I went to England. That's not true. I must have been eager. Did you talk to humanity about this link? I thought it wouldn't do anything for angels. I only had courier trains at night to the army groups in the Vom Bahnhof Schwimmerstraße, the night. You just had to be careful when trying to get on the right courier train. Courier trains are sleeping car trains, they leave from Riemenschülerstraße. And each army group has its own trains within its own trains. You just have to make sure that you don't accidentally end up in Army Group "Noch or here from "Mitte or "Wiersgruppe "Ditze. You have to make sure you're in the right platoon. But you can only do that in the evening after dark, when it's ten o'clock or something. So I still had hours to spare. And, of course, I felt that this was no longer the case. You have to live, but you have to live again. And the illustrator phoned my friend Ines Reimer. She suggested the probability that it wasn't quite the security police. It was a fight of mine. And that's when you asked about Auschwitz? Yes, I was very focused. Then he met with her in a restaurant and I drove them together. That's when he finally met me with her. And she looked burnt out and tired and sad and smart, what's going on here? And then she said, "On the table, the nails you don't have after all. What we really say is good, it's Christmas in Germany. That's not what they meant. That was quite nice. So what? I have to explain whether it is. Unimaginable. Yes, it took me a long time to find out that they were employees of the Berlin transport company and the German Reich Chancellery. You have to build trust and pay a penny now and then to get good information. That cost me something. The trains that go to Hauschreuz have to be brought in this morning. It goes from one train driver to the next, so to speak. This is the news agency. That's what it looks like. I say yes, do we know what's up? Where and what? Several attempts were made. The next day this message was carried again. For my point of view, I have said my point of view everything, everything, everything that is written here. Everything with exclusion. And what did he say? Difficult. Not a word. Did you say? Manstein, do you know what to do? He said something about it. I was a first lieutenant and there was General Cettmar. I also wanted to keep my position with me. I learned what I wanted a long time ago. Even if only a little. How would you describe a Nazi? There are all kinds of Nazis, all kinds. We don't know the real Nazis. Above all, how would you describe a Jew? Just a kind of big perspective. Went to my school class, did my Abitur, at the founder of the Gymnasium in a class that had 24 students at the gate. But how would you describe a Jew? A Rulle? Yes, but that's so imaginable. You said there are rounds that lead to Kalitschia, they are for many people. There are laps that are high in the laps. That's a bit difficult. But if you're wonderfully logical again now, Chad is the dream they're looking for, the different callings you've played on. Chad has learned to hit still short and in school that this is not a problem. But yes, not anymore. Dietrich Bonheffer spoke to me, the first person who dared to speak. We live, we know that we don't know that. Fate is a situation, because we have an octocraphy. An octocraphy can be said to be Bohemian, Russian, Romanizing, which is constructed on octocraphy. Yes, they have the describing know what Olaf says. Alexander, what did you learn from the second world war? What is the half-sentence? What is in a sentence? In one sentence, what did you learn? You know, from you personally, you can say the Europeans are becoming the right.Yes, that's that. Yes, that's that. And that's when we made the boot picture. And then we asked ourselves, how can we hope to live here for so long? How can we achieve something again that was independent of the functioning of society? After all, we have this immensity of abuse, which also affects us. That is one of the worst points of comparison. In Darmouth, you were afraid to enter the Third Reich because you had a great-grandfather, a Jewish great-grandfather. Were you afraid? I had to risk myself. No, I didn't ask myself whether I should do it. Were you dreaming at the time? Yes, it was a nightmare. Scared. I even, I would like to say, I tried to look for the real in my small frame, to find some good in this terrible time. For example, when I think that we managed to save my whole family, my Polish family, when we were imprisoned at the end of September, with the end of the Polish festival or extermination, that we succeeded, as I have always said well. For me, that's also a little bit of comradeship, when I have a part of this family, which would certainly have been built up by the Nazis, thanks to every squirrel and other families of Heinrich Jones. I have only known for a year, now only a generation later, that the family still exists, that were not selected for Canada. Many such, terrible such, are still alive. In France, there was a day when we realized that we had nothing to wear, that year, where we actually landed, at the end of May 1940, capital, in our declaration of sacrifice, the inhabitants of Amiens were closed in front of us, the direction of Bordeaux, the population. Here comes an evacuated Amiens in the city and that is also almost happy and in Amiens and Abugil, our second and friendship south, south of the late, Amiens and Abugil. There we are with our little contact driving puddles, two bridgeheads. Okay. That's too bright for you. Okay. After my baccalaureate in 1940, I still hope to be able to study. But before someone was allowed to study in Germany at the time, he had to go to the right other. That's how I came to the right other team in the Roman Germany and Germany-Kohlshtein. When I was there for 10 days, I was asked by the German to come to the Arbeitsdienstführer and he had my personal document before him. And he said: "I'm learning here that you are working in a student. "he said: "I hope you will be a correct arbeitsdienstman. And I said: "I had to come to the right arbeitsdienst because otherwise I wouldn't be allowed to study at all. So I was for several months in the reicharbeitsdienst. When I came home, it was clear that it wouldn't be allowed for me to study the law as it was my first idea. It was strictly forbidden for me.There was, I thought, perhaps a possibility to study at, study, technical university, uh, and so I applied to be a student, uh, on the technical university. Uh, but though I was coming out of the Reichsarbeitsdienst, the technical university wrote a letter to me that the Minister for Education of Nazi Germany, uh, had told the director of the technical university that the director wouldn't be allowed to, uh, introduce me into the technical university as a student. Mm-hmm. And they turned you down because you were half-Jewish, so to speak? Yes. Hmm. How did you feel? Uh, well, it was, uh, getting, uh, every month later against Michlina, Michlina from first grade. Mm-hmm. But I was rather lucky that there were some companies in Berlin- Mm-hmm. ... uh, which were taking Michlina of first grade as apprentices. Mm-hmm. And so, I was lucky to, to become an apprentice, um, in the, uh, cable factory of Dr. Casira, that was still the old Jewish name. Mm-hmm. Um, and I was able to start there an apprenticeship on commercial repair. Mm-hmm. And from this company, I was arrested on the 4th of April 1944, uh, by the Gestapo action Haase, uh, when I was, uh, uh, ordered to come to the organization, Organization Todt, uh, camp in Eisenach. And, uh, there were about 150 guys and suddenly we were told we were not allowed to leave the camp and then not to inform our relatives and in the evening, we were marched to the, uh, railway station, (German). Mm-hmm. Uh, we were brought there into, uh, uh, wagons, not for persons but for goods. Uh, and we were guarded by really OT members, Organization Todt members, with rifles. Mm-hmm. And then, suddenly we were brought away towards the west and after some days, we arrived in, uh, in Oise in northern part of France. And we were afterward brought to Bologna, uh, into a camp with a barbed wire around. And, uh, the French, uh, OT members were rather bad. Mm-hmm. And we were only allowed to go to the toilet under guardianship of these French OT members. Mm-hmm. Uh, and then we were told that if one died, if fleeing when we were, we were, uh, walked into groups of 10 and then the leader of the 10 will be, uh, shot. Uh, and this was a hard, hard time. We were brought every morning to a working place under rifle guardianship. Uh, we had to work there hard, uh, in the heat of it. Um, and after, uh, some weeks, some of us were brought away to (German), also in northern France, to work there in a new bunker. Mm-hmm. Um, which the Nazis were going to build. But we had no idea at that time what for. Afterwards, we learned that the bunker was, uh, the basis to start the V2. But fortunately, uh, the bunker was never coming to an end. There were also a lot of air raids and we were lucky that only two, I remember two of our group were injured. Um, and on the 6th of June 1944, in the morning the sirens were starting and they were not stopped and so we had the idea that something happened. Mm-hmm. And, uh, during the day, before the Nazis feared that we are a danger for them in this area because they thought that the Allied troops would, would land not only in Normandy but also in the area of Paris. Mm-hmm.... who had fought with parts from (speaks German) to Lille, and we were arrested in Lille, in the Citadel. It was our last camp, arres- arrest camp. Arrest camp? Not arrest camp. Mm-hmm. Uh, (machine whirring) and, uh, when the Allies thought we're coming nearer, suddenly one morning, the guards went away but we didn't know what to do now. And, um, I first had thought to stay there to wait for the other group, uh, but on the other hand, I feared that the other group had no idea about our situation. Nobody knew in other countries, even though in Germany a- a lot of people, uh, that we are, uh- Outs? Yeah, outs. Outs. Uh- Out- outsiders? Out, out, out of the (clears throat), out of the German, uh, uh, Nazi company, uh, and we are not belonging to the Nazis, but on the contrary. Uh, but on the other hand, we were Germans, and so I feared that nobody would understand us. Um, and so I decided to try to go back to Berlin, hoping that the other group would follow soon too. But unfortunately, this was an error. Uh, nevertheless, I got back to Berlin with some problems. Uh, when we came, we were a group of five. We came to the German, uh, border near Aachen. Mm-hmm. We were arrested again by the German military police because they thought we have deserted the German army. Mm-hmm. We had, we had no uniform. We had only a working class with the P on the back, that means . Mm-hmm. Um, but the German military, military police had no idea about our situation. Mm-hmm. And they thought we, we left the German army, and so we were arrested again. Mm-hmm. But nevertheless, after some, some, uh, discussions, we could convince them that we were German workers and we had not deserted the German army. And so we came to Berlin, but even in Berlin, I had no idea what to do. We were not, uh, very lucky to go back to the Otay Camp. But unfortunately, the Allied troops were not coming on. And then, they were stopped a bit by the Ardennes Offensive by the, by the Nazis. Mm-hmm. And I had no ration cards to give on. Mm-hmm. And so it was a very difficult decision what to do. And so after having, uh, lived for about two or three weeks without ration cards in Berlin, um, I didn't know what to do at all. So I went again to the Otay because the Allied troops were not coming. And after two more months, they arrested me again and I was brought to another Gestapo action. Uh, this was called Miete. The first action of the Gestapo was called Hase. Mm-hmm. And I was brought together with my father, uh, though my father was pure Aryan, uh, we were brought together into a new camp, uh, on an airport near Schöndorf, near the Elm. Mm-hmm. And there, I was working to build tunnels together with my father. Um, so the Allied troops were coming nearer to the Elm. Mm-hmm. And, um, we fled again, uh, to Berlin before the Russians were coming from the other side. Mm-hmm. And so we were in Berlin when the Russians arrived there. But, um, we had some problems because my mother got, uh, a letter from the Gestapo to go there, and she didn't know why and she didn't know what, what, what, what will, will, will happen. Uh, and so my mother decided to go to, to live on as a submarine. Mm-hmm. Uh, and she lived with good Aryan friends. It was very difficult because she has no ration card. Mm-hmm. Um, but she lived in Berlin, uh, submerged with Aryan friends. Uh, and so we were going to see my mother when my father and me were coming back from the camp on the airport near Schöndorf. Mm-hmm. And so we were together, all three, when the Russians arrived in Berlin. Mm-hmm. Now, could, could you give me your name and tell me when and where you were born? Where I'm when? You were born. Um, yeah. Uh, I am born in the Black Forest in Schwenningen.On the 28th of September, 1921. And your name? And my name is Klaus Yvonne Bosard. When you were born, were both your parents, uh, Jewish? You just said your father was not. My, my father- my mother was Jewish. And what was her maiden name? My, my... The maiden name of my mother was Posner. Hmm. And when you were growing up, did you have much contact with your Jewish grandparents and your Jewish family? Yes, of course. Uh, my, my Jewish grandmother was still living- Mm-hmm. ... um, when I was growing, growing up. Uh, she was living with us and she was deported first to Theresienstadt in '41 and she died in Theresienstadt. Hmm. And when you were young, did you go into the synagogue and did you learn about- No. ... Jewish culture? No. Uh, uh, of course I learned something about Jewish culture from my grandmother. Mm-hmm. But, but I was not going to the synagogue. Hmm. What, what were you taught? Uh, I was taught Christian. I was, uh, I was going to school in Dahlem. Mm-hmm. In Berlin-Dahlem. Uh, and, uh, we were there under the, uh, education of, uh (speaks German). Mm-hmm. Uh, but I was brought up as a Christian. Hmm. Were you circumcised? Did you have a Jewish birth or were you circum- Were you circumcised? No. No. No. Uh, did you have any brothers or sisters? No. No. So when... 1933, when Hitler took over power, uh, did you start talking with your mother and father what you should do, uh, and stuff? Yeah, totally. Yeah, we, we did. Uh, but we were not so rich as to go straightaway out of Germany. Mm-hmm. Uh, and, uh, we thought that it wouldn't be so, uh, so, uh, becoming sort of possible for, for coming afterwards. Mm-hmm. Uh, but after the Nondag-... We left in '35, my parents had the idea to bring me to the Great Britain, uh, and there was a special office from Pastor Groover. Pastor Groover was, uh, a Protesta- Protest- Protestant, uh, um, pastor. Mm-hmm. Who had a special office here in Berlin for, uh, for Christians of Jewish or half-Jewish origin. Mm-hmm. And he was trying to bring these people out of Germany. Mm-hmm. And so we were starting to bring me out to Great Britain, but then the war was starting. Oh, so this was a process that lasted all the way to '39? Yeah. Hmm. Now, after, uh...