[HEBREW TRANSLATION] Okay. In October, October 10, 2009, and then the order came from them, they had to want that in the rooms. Two thousand one. Then my teams were detached and so the day never came back. One week to be ordered to be shot in You can still go on the run. He had Oct. 1, I know, the teaching assignment for a kitchen in Belgium, he was supposed to be a teacher and now what he was and his neighbor, who was supposed to have him in Stanning, who came through just like that, he had to stay there a week before The one was already. Do you know that we come here? Mr. van Holländer. Where were you born? On January twenty-first, nineteen hundred and ninety-one in Hilkolzen. That would be time. Yes, yes, in the country. Strange things. Okay. None of mine made it. And if Have you ever spoken to Mr. Holunder? Hohenschon. You must have in the thirties. In the thirties? In the evening. But then I returned to skiing. We're in the area, we have a lot to do. I have two sisters and a brother who was the youngest. And two sisters who are older. And we danced here in the navy and also at Wehr in Rendsburg and Fencenburg and Schwedenstieg. We always had balls in the winter and because we were three sisters, we always brought a lot of things like Mr. and then we danced there and so on and I went to kindergarten with my husband. But she preferred dinner. No, no, not true from the first look. And then I get other friends. Laughing And then we met in Zum Skilachsen. That was during the war, yes. Yes, in the war, yes. I didn't know in the 1930s. Yes, well, then we met again, oh yes, and from there they wrote to us and so on And now we've been forty-three years old. Did he celebrate your birthday? That he even had to go to Europe all those years ago in the forest with my father and, if I may say so, he told me beforehand. How did he say it? I can answer that for you. No, no. But was it embarrassing or worse? Well, not embarrassing really. He didn't really know how it was going to turn out either. Two thousand and one should or shouldn't. And what's his name, please? Walter Holländer. Yes. Yes. And he was born when In the year two thousand and thirty. By the way, if you've never spoken to him, what's the contact number of his Jewish grandmother Did he have contact with your Jewish studies? No. So, he was not baptized. Here, he was not cut. No, no, no. What happened to the first one? They only converted to the Protestant faith. Already very deeply baptized. But many years in the beginning. Yes, already good. God the Father was already a Protestant. Mhm mhm And did Mr. Amte like being a soldier? Yes. I think his thoughts were yes, of course. What did he say about his soldier? I still have all that in the book. So I didn't experience that anymore, that he wanted to take a break from the war because of him, because he was just thinking about it. Okay, I'd already been there in the fifties. School clubs. Thirty-nine. No, nine hundred and twenty-three was before that. What could that look like? I already find it difficult. Thirty-three. October thirty-three and he'll be ten thirty-four by the spring and his German faith has not yet been recognized. That's whyAnd yes, please? And then, um, I took that with me. Mhm. Or at least not any closer. Mhm. And how was it possible for him to stay in the German army as an officer and also have a character? That was nothing. How did he get permission, no, he's already entered what. Second two hundred thousand nine hundred and twenty-three he graduated from high school. And then, only in April two thousand and twenty he entered. Mmm. And so, it wasn't a thing, because he would have got in. No, not at all. He didn't say anything about how he got the permit, this German civil declaration? Didn't speak much? No, but there always has to be a father. So there were actually two of them. What did your father do about it? My father wasn't very happy. You said you were a hater. Oh, that was the face question, thank God. But you did. You appreciated it afterwards. Yes. You did. Yes. Sometimes nothing before. How did someone turn out? Good. He was tall. No, he wasn't. So full. He was as good as me. If I wore high ab If I wore high heels, then wait, what's the point? I did eighteen I did with school shoes. Long dress, mhm, I borrowed, I have a little fabric of mine. Yous is. I borrowed and then I put on the sneaker so I wasn't taller than him. Yes. And then it was at a horse house. Super. It may have been a schmau dream. It may have been talented and smaller. Was he a statesman or a bit strong? Nope, was also wrong, no way. He had a lot of money. And broke off from the war. He was personalized in Poland. Yes. Did they come to him then? He was very proud. He went into the war on horseback. He was very proud. He was very proud in Poland. He marched in on the ground. And what did he do there? Not many people did that. I see. And what did he say about the Poles themselves? The Polish tyskus is all so fast. Yes, no. Mhm. And he was there with a company. Mm. He came from Münster. Münster is also here in Schließholz and then he got it at his last war station. Mm. And so, that happened very quickly. I didn't know him then. Mhm. And from there, yes, and later he went to Poland through the I don't know, but he somehow told us that he was in the world. What years were those? If I'm so far now, which is after the course, What's more of the Warsaw Ghetto was that, wasn't it? Wait, but what was Oh, fire I have to tell you again. There you go. He did the settler coup in Munich in nineteen twenty-three. There was already the earth, there was already ten in it. Did he take part before Hitler? Or? Cleaning Hitler's estate. It's on the ninth of November, this Hitler cleaning in Munich, that the commander is all marching. Waiting for Hitler. The whole, there was already SA, wasn't there? And he went to war school in Munich back then to become a lieutenant. And they know that now. They marched with him. They were young and there was something going on and now we want to see what will happen there and so on, I don't know. And they marched along and the next day they all had to report to Colonel General von Wintz and he showed them a halt. No, nothing like that in the Wehrmacht beforehand. Afterwards, all those who took part in the march received a medal of honor. They had a red stand again. Just for the tooth. He said, don't go up now, but at DSSSC, they only have SS and SS work. So, he got this medal, but he no, no. But he could have this medal. He would have this medal. He would have this work medal. What was your husband's relationship with Hitler? Hmm. He realized very early on, actually already in Russia, helt wo. I realized that he wanted something. No? Was he politically dead? Was he a member of the party or? No, no, no. But not politically at all, but he was very much at home and could get his way with the children. But he was also very afraid of what would happen if we won the war. With whom? With whom? No, not just with whom, hopefully with Germans. What was your name? He touched the children there. He wanted to touch them, what was to come, but he held out that it would be terrible. When he first heard about the Orschau ghetto, what did he do? Fighting power. You have to face up to your fighting strength. You have to face up to the fact that you like each other. What does he have here now? Second question. Second question. That we only remember that he drove through and wouldn't have listened to a sausage. So why did he drive through? Out of New Disaster. And is he afraid of himself, that he was trusted a little? No, no, no. No, no. So he took security for these documents. Were you afraid, your husband, because of his Jewish background? No. Then they had given birth over the Holocaust, in the bread of youth. Without me. Not really. And what was your warning in response? Yes, well... The filming and stuff, I only filmed that later, long after the climate. About the wrestlers. About the wrestlers, yes. That's really there, how long it goes on. We want to see that. And did your husband lose the Jeven, the Holocaust? No. What does he have you with his weaker women? You told us a bit beforehand. Yes, we were just, as I said, abroad. Why are you abroad? Yes, one of them married a German premium merchant and then went to India, where she was interned for a long time. And the other one, she went to Africa, because she went there and grew up in Africa. I don't know whether my father-in-law died at the age of 29, 28. So 93, he went to Africa in 1973. In South Africa. She was brought up as a sports teacher and kindergarten teacher. They didn't go abroad because of Hillary. Yes, the kindergarten directors did. They're more like that, but you took a pupil with you? Yes, and then later, since he got married, she had three sons. Three sons. And the two people. And the two people. And you protected her father-in-law? My father-in-law, he gave me... For the real one. I still have ancestors in it upstairs. I can show you that again. All I know is that there were, I think, three citizens. And we were the Benjamin-Holländer family. For example, one of them was in Berlin and the other was also in Africa. He had another wife-in-law, so he had to go to Africa again... But he stayed longer. Again, there was a Vorwärtsbau or something like that. They went there again, the registration curve and the third one was back to them. But there is still a Metel of mine here. The Metel. Please go there. It's in Munich. With the name Alisa? With the name, yes. He has the same name as my son Johann. And yes, that's good. Yes, the Nazi leech. In 1933, when this Animate came, what was the mood in your family, in your skin? Yes. I know myself here now. What did your pass do with it? But my father was in New York, he was very outspoken. Ah, that was in 1938. The BDM were also too recreational, there in the country. You had to be BDM. Mhm And that's where you did that, where we BDM? Bdm, you know, BDM, it was like that, we went hiking, we sang songs, we had picnics outdoors and stuff like that. It was nothing political. Mhm Not at all. Mhm And what kind of work did your father do? My father was a farmer. And he actually, he had a hope for this party. Yes, that things would get better. Did you hear anything when you were sitting on the heights in 1935? We had that at school. They reported on it. Yes. What did you think back then? Yes, I wanted to do the same thing. Did you have friends who had so-called Mädchenwaren or Jüngelwaren? No. Then you all had so-called Germans. So, from those times. Christana. Yes. What had you heard about it? Yes, we heard that on the radio. And then you did what? And then I went to Grünberg with my parents, but not the thing. My father somehow had a child in Grünberg. We drove to Grünberg and there we drove past the Sinner booth, I remember that exactly. And we asked the driver about the people "Do you like me? They counted out the synagogue. Just before. All out without a dot. Without a festival of divorces without a point. And what did your father say why it happened? Yes, we knew that. We were told that by the radio. And what did the radio say? I don't remember anything like that. So long ago. And in 1939, when you go on the ground, you were afraid there. What was the mood back then? I was happy. You and I were happy. And what did your father see? My father was hired. Really? In December. Why? He was an animal himself. He was a soldier in the sister? Yes. And my father had to serve in the... What do you call him? When he was here in Poland and Franz, he was four-headed. Okay. And what a long one. Ah, he was the captain. He was the captain. He was the same, yes. Was he proud to be a soldier? No. A judo bottom to wear? No. He was proud to be a soldier. And so in thirty-nine years, he was only once again inducted. The speech is again. Yes. So, today is eighty-seven. Mm. And thirty-nine really took us to Berlin. Sitting. Is it sitting? Sitting down. And when he told us about his origins, that he had become a so-called Mischling, did you know what a so-called Mischling actually was? Yes, I experienced that. You learned about the breeds. Yes. Are the students. Are the students. What did you think of racial studies? I've always done it. How did you pass out that there was a girl with Hare on her hand? With Hare on her hand? I led in at school. Mmm. And did the pupil tell you that you looked like a North German Aryan person? Yes, yes, yes. Yes, it can. Unreal. They showed that on you. I actually only have you. She was quite gnarled. She was always ahead of her time. Really? Yes. You took it very seriously. You took the pupils? Yes. How did you find that out? Ask me if you did that. Then I can tell you about it. So, how did you actually get into the milk with Mr. Walter Haunde? Exactly, that actually came about through our letters. Letters? Yes. Because then he came on vacation and then we saw each other and then we didn't try, but then we both wrote letters and only then did he not. And then we didn't fall in love. And what was, what was the picture of those letters that were so important? Exactly, where everything is told. What's here and how... You could close up very well. The letter here was wonderful. Do you still have these letters? Yes, I remembered them all. Did he decide on this war? Did he go on a training course in Grube? No, he only has the family party. A family celebration is a request to fight. And my father-in-law said that, didn't he? Not my father-in-law. But he couldn't do anything with my father. It wasn't a good relationship. Why? He was always more obsessed with his mother. And was allowed to have a wife. But I think that came about because my son went to this humanist grammar school where his father taught a lot. And I think his father always wanted to do a lot. He wanted to bleed a lot. Yes, he wanted to bleed a lot. And that wasn't so good. His father didn't like the fact that he was vaporized. From his father? Is that right? Yes, from his father. And was he an officer? Yes, I think so. He was an officer, wasn't he his father? His father, yes. But he said he wasn't happy about his son choosing to go into the Reichswerter. That went further. Did you find it strange that you were lost through a so-called loss. Did you find that strange or was that not an issue? No. It wasn't talked about at the time either. It was a taboo? Yes, it was a bit taboo. Was your mother-in-law probably afraid of you? No. Why not? No, they were very much under interrogation, my mother-in-law and him. My mother was born 90 years ago. Always was really a bit against her. But I know him when you're in the Dutch "documents, there's a bottom laugh up there. Did she want? A Dutchman? Yes. He had to check all the prisoners in the O.K.H. When the news from Russia came. And then he says: "There's a Dutchman listed here and since the Russians write a G, an H, it's probably always true. He is in captivity. He's still in Russia, still in Sutscherstadt. That's where they gave the news. You got the first message very early. Yes, but then I haven't had a night for three years. Were you afraid that it would be postponed? No, not really. What did you think? I thought it wouldn't work. He can't write or what? And then he was sentenced to forced labor, 25 years of forced labor. 25 years, forced labor? Yes. For what? Because he shelled villages in the middle section and... Laid down. Did he do that? He worked here. What kind of... He was in the assault division? Was that artillery? No, assault regiment, assault division. They were assault guns. He had tanks and they were assault guns. So, he was in a tank? Did he kill that village? Yes. But did he give an order or did he follow an order? No, he gave an order. So what did he say about it, about his judgment? Yes, that's not entirely good, but it was in... Sentenced in '49 and he came home in '56, through laborers' walls. What kind of work did he do, if you mean well. He fished with wood, fish floor. Here, the moldings are all still from him. Really? Yes. Really? Yes. He did this in Russia? But only the little ones, only the little ones. Really? Yes. He did all that in Russia? Yes. Was he very mischievous about his empire in Russia? He had a lot of energy. For God's sake. Every day he went and went, running and keeping so healthy. What he had here, how he worked, he didn't shit at all. He learned very well originally, but had no paper to write down vocabulary. Every text with the smallest pieces of paper and the smallest pencils. So he wrote one? Yes, he wrote one. Even those little sentences? No, not with the small sentences, but paper with them. And then he took very good care here and then he diced up the messages afterwards and had a circle, but this one.At the circle of prisoners, the head is also part of it. And some of the top brass, who I also got to know, and so on. But he laughs, it would have been very difficult. You had to be very careful, even in captivity. There's this one now... There was a lot of spying. Everyone was spied on in this case. Spinion. Spignone? Yes. So, he has Noch. Still. And you said he called very good Russian. Did he use that after you? After? No, only when he... He was in Paris once before he died. He was invited there with Russian... A movie was shown there that was shot or re-enacted in the Russian way by I think the Stalin factor. Really? Yes. And there were Russian generals there and two or three people from Germany who had to judge it. The French live very much with their soldiers, much more so than here. And what did he say about that? This movie. Yes, this movie. And the Russians, they thought it was all very nice and they always talked against it, the Germans. They said: "It wasn't like that. Because your husband, after the war, did he feel guilty for what he did during the war? No. No. What did he say about his activities during the war? That was his work. His work, yes. And did he, if he knew about the Holocaust, after the war, as you said, he didn't see this ghetto during the war, he no longer saw it, but he also knew about the deportation. Yes, but then he didn't, so to speak. But he heard about all these deportations, didn't he? No. Well, only after the war. I don't have that much to say about the whole movie. Films then too. And so, if he knew about the Holocaust, what did he think about it? Did he say at some point that it could have been me? Yes, no, it was actually very good that my father loved me, that he didn't react that way anymore. That was very good. You can get it somewhere in the department store. What he said. And did he keep in touch with his comrades after the war? Yes. See them again? Or what did they do? Yes. Well, yes. He also visited his regiments then and yet we are there. And what did your soldiers think of him? Very attached? I think he was quite popular. He was? Believed, yes. Why do you say "I think? Was he very strict? I can't say that. I don't know. But what did you tell your comrades about it? I was never in a garrison. I met my husband when he was at war, or at least I got married when he was at war. There was no longer a garrison. That's why I never lived in a garrison. That's why I didn't know the soldiers for so short a time, or that the soldiers... And during the war you had a lot of leave. What did he tell you about the war? Can you remember? Yes, he did, but he also told me. Stalingrad, Rostov and wherever he had been. What did he say about Stalingrad? I don't know. In Wau and that's where the supplies were. The supplies, that's why they were there... He could, they had all the assault guns further in the middle, where he was captured. They had no reception, they couldn't drive anymore. They all had to be there. And then he said that a lieutenant and some men had come and said: "We want to get away from here as well. I'm sorry, how would you like to leave?" Then he said: "Yes, do that, but you won't get any further. Here in Russia, in the middle, where do you want to go? Who gave you this order? Go on to Stalingrad. No, don't go any further. He was transferred there. He was actually transferred there and Hitler gave the order that they had to clear the north again and then just not attack or anything else. In any case, they had to get out again. And then he was transferred to Belgium, to the school there, as a teacher, at the Grand Commander's office in Antwerp, where there was a commander. You can see all that. Did Mr. Hause hope that Germany would win the war? No, that's what he said. So at least 43, and he said forty, could hardly win. I don't know exactly who told Russia himself, but before Stalin or after Stalin. What was his hope for the future? What was your hope too? Yes, that was once a hope. That he would come home anyway and that we would somehow still have a good life here. And in 1939 40 41 Germany had conquered almost all of Europe. What did Mr. Holunder think back then? There was hardly a chance that we would lose the war. This war was over. France was conquered, Poland too. There was peace in the East. What was his hope there? Yes, but I don't know. I think all these thoughts came afterwards. First of all through his friend, whom he spoke to. I don't know, they were friends. I never got to know them. The one on July 20. I didn't notice anything. Who's your name? Schulze Büttger. He took part. And that was it. Yes. Did Dutch try something? No, they talked about it once, but my husband didn't want to. Why didn't he do something against Hitler? Everyone has a responsibility. Maybe he could have done something. He didn't talk about it after the war? He knew a lot of people. Was it embarrassing for him that he didn't take part? No, no, no. But he said no, he didn't want to. What did, what did he do? Maybe it's because he's just ruffled. Maybe it's because he didn't want to stand out again or something. Did he say that? No, he didn't say it. You think that maybe yes, that could be the case. Occasionally. What did he say about Hitler when he was fighting the Second World War, he said he was a great politician, a great gentleman. Do I want to know that? No, but many say. We were young. We were talking about Hitler now. No, but he was older. He was 15 years older. But he did. You think he was a bit. Maybe very old, because he was a bit. He was afraid of his Jewish background. Afraid of what? What are you saying? Because his camaraderie is so good. Yes. And good after the war too. His comrades helped him. Yes, very gladly. What did Uwe say about the Wehrmacht? Was it a decent organization? That's what he said. Yes. Did he see or hear about the shooting of Jews in Russia? No, but that's not possible. And did he dream about the war after the war? I don't know. Maybe sometimes, but not like that. Not so much that he screamed. Did he? No, no, no, no. What did he say about his soldier side after the war? How did he describe his soldier side? After the war? He was just enthusiastic. He was enthusiastic and he didn't think it was everything, but a lot. It came out very well and he also had the duty to get around here. He's also beaten away from the rotation. Bebo had at the turn. Pretty please? No, I don't know. So that was his. The Wehrmacht. And we talk a lot about Jews and so-called Nazis. How would you describe a Nazi? What was a Nazi back then? Hm, I don't know. The Nazis don't know me. Would you say that your father, because he was a member, was a Nazi? What, what would you say? Yes, he was the right one. And the right question. He may have liked a lot of the things Hitler did. That simple. Mhm. But she changed that. She changed that a long time ago with the war. Yes. So how would you describe a. Yes. How would you describe that? I know this is a difficult question, but how would you describe it? Fanatical. I see. And then very unpleasant. But in the country, they weren't all so Krallh-like. How would you describe a Jew? A Jewish person? Most of them are intelligent here and I always regretted not getting to know my father-in-law. I would have liked to have met him. Why? What did you hear? Yes, that was just intelligent reading, sporty. I regret not having met him. What did Mrs. Hamder say about him? Oh, the woman really admired him too. She had a good relationship with her. Yes. It was just Walter and his father who didn't... Yes, not them. Got it. Maybe she's the one with the child. How would you describe a so-called half-breed now? Other than my husband, I can't. Was it a burden for your husband to be a so-called Mischling? No, maybe in Berlin back then, when they told him he couldn't go on doing the General Statute. Because he... That was it. Really? Yes. His mother went to see him there too, because his sister had gone there first and she had said she had to help him. But she was with him for a week a year and she was very depressed. We talked about it once, after the war or in the neighborhood. She calls my mother-in-law, who she also remembered. Actually, he could have made Generalrank. He could have, yes. But he resigned because he was a so-called Halbjürgen. He was what? A lieutenant colonel? He was a colonel. He was a colonel. Then he tried one more time to become a general? No, I don't know. I'm not that militarily educated. But I think that if you went to this general staff school, the war school back then in Berlin, yes, what was the pattern in 1933, if you didn't do it, the... What was it like now? General Staff examination. If you don't have that, then you can't have generals. I can't tell that one hundred percent. I don't know exactly. Were you proud to have a husband who was an officer? Yes. And his mother had problems during the Nazi era because her son was a so-called half-Jew and was recruiting in Germany. Did she find that funny? No, something like that? No, no. She knew that her son wanted to do that and that's okay. No problem. You have something out here? No, I've just got... It's from the German market. He's from the German market. He always talked about Napoleon? Yes. What did he get out of it? He was very good at history. He was very good at that, and so was my husband. And German landscapes. He knew German landscapes. He knew every landscape, whether it was a banana or an area somewhere. He must have always written poems when we were driving through the thought structure or somewhere. Yes, well, back then he was also very, very, very, very, don't be so celebratory. For what did he say he had me? I didn't know anything. I didn't even wait to get into the whole sock. I wanted to ask him if he knew anything. About your word. Yes. He was happy for me. Yes, but I was. And then I've now got through Vokalarter... Okay, the Riegengelichte from Mr. Walter Holle. Mr. Holländer, one of them is on 28 January, my birthday. Is that? "Beautiful day and night from you, so full of longing, my cannon. Where would I finally be away from you and here only imprisoned with you. Captivity, a harsh word. You shall not teach me a chain, for now with you I shall teach you to walk as a fortress of the greatest happiness. He can on January 16, 1956 on the salary. And that was my birthday. And this is a year later, the pennant from my son. Now it is given to me again and it is a present from our childhood pet. Here at the year I mean all the thanks my whole life no longer flows.