[HEBREW TRANSLATION] ... knight at the University of Queens, and was truly a knight. Mm-hmm. You know what that means, right? And, uh, by 1933 he was a schoolmaster of a school for youngsters who worked at, uh, law firms. Mm-hmm. Not lawyers, but the, uh, service there. Mm-hmm. Apprentices. And in 1933, he was... He still was working- Mm-hmm. ... carried on as a teacher through university, but not as the headmaster of the, the school. Not because of his half-Jewish, uh- Background? ... background, but because of his not being a Nazi and everybody knew that he was. They hated the Nazis. Mm-hmm. There was no, nothing ever happened. And in 1933, when all my uncles and aunts- Mm-hmm. ... became members of the hitling. I also wanted to become a member of the hitling, but did not know it was not Jewish then like that. Mm-hmm. And my mother then told me about her Jewish grandfather. Why didn't your father? I don't know. He, he, he was hiding behind a bush. Mm-hmm. He was ashamed, not so much of his, uh, Jewish, uh, half-Jewish background. Mm-hmm. But he was ashamed of the fact that he was born out of wedlock. Mm-hmm. Which is ridiculous. Mm-hmm. But anyway, they, they, this was 1920, he was born, he had to stop studying. Uh, the other people they put into work. Mm-hmm. They were ashamed of being out, born out of wedlock. Mm-hmm. So, it was my mother who told me. How'd you feel? Including... Well, I didn't take it to be serious at the time, but I understood that the Nazis were wrong. Well, in 1935 when the Nuremberg Laws came out- No, this was, this was earlier. This was either '33 or '34. Mm-hmm. But then the drawing club- Mm-hmm. ... of my school, which I was still their captain- Mm-hmm. ... was then incorporated into the Hitling group. Maybe it was Marine Hitling, you know. Mm-hmm. So, I did become a member of the Hitling group. Then was, was, uh... Disbanded in 1938. Again, not because I didn't know enough, but because I had a speaking my mind, which was not very favorable for the country. So, you weren't scared at this particular time? No, I wasn't. Especially after the Nuremberg Laws? No, no. When suddenly you and your brother were- No. No, no. ... so-called missioning? No, no, no, no. Did you discuss this with your family at all? No. My mother had told me nobody knew about it and that she would not talk to anyone. Mm-hmm. And, uh, I didn't. Mm-hmm. And when I was drafted into the, into the war in those years, in 1937- Mm-hmm. ... I thought I was staying. Mm-hmm. Then it occurred to me that I was not staying. Did you ever have a really bad experience in the German army? Medic table. Just as long as you were optional? No. Oh. And, uh, in 19... early 1942, my wife and I decided to marry. This is now three years later. Mm-hmm. And, uh, then it so happened that my commander- Mm-hmm. ... pulled off to exercise and come, told me that I needed a genehmigung to marry. I did not know that. I thought it was only necessary to go professionally. I was just water, you know? Mm-hmm. Maybe... Maybe I just added it up because he said to me we have to tell you about that. So my brother- Mm-hmm. ... well, when they told me that I needed, uh, anybody needed, needed a genehmigung, a permit to marry, and the commander told me that I should see to it that my wife or my fiance at the time should pay a visit to his wife. Mm-hmm. The obvious purpose was to find out whether she was the best for me. Mm-hmm. Whether she would fit to be the wife of an officer. Obviously, she was. Mm-hmm. And she was a teacher at the city at the time. She had to travel down to Bonn. At that time, I was in Bonn- Mm-hmm. ... curing up a severe case of tuberculosis, which I had caused in Russia. Mm-hmm. And, uh, so the next thing they told me was that I had to, in order to get this permit to marry- Mm-hmm. ... I had to prove my absence. Mm-hmm. This then led to my first conversation with my father. Mm-hmm. And my father said, "Well, I have obtained this from..." Some, some paper or something.... could help? No, no, no, no, no. This is specially... You have a, uh, a special office in any, any German community, where they, where they, um, keep files about your birth, about your death, about- Court house. Court house? Maybe. Maybe that is it. The German word at least is something, but I don't know about that. It's translated into French. At least he had gotten a statement with his name on it and a signature which says that his father was unknown. Mm-hmm. In fact, he knew his father very, very well because the father had made alimony publicly and maybe a nice sum of money to his foster parents, so they got... anyway- Would your father, uh, would your grandfather have visited you? I don't know. I don't... He wasn't... Some of the Jews, I think, yeah, who for some reason had left Hamburg because of sex offenses. I tried to find out traces about the man later on, but I didn't find much. Uh, there's a, there's an officer I know, a researcher, Mr. Mandel, or at least there was, who has tried to try to... tries or did try to find out this history of losing Mandel. But they didn't find much about his, uh, grandfather. Anyway, he's got a statement with his name on it and a signature that his father was unknown. Mm-hmm. And I got a copy of this and showed it to the British staff of my unit. They were not interested in it at all. They... as a matter of routine. Were you scared that nothing would come up? No, I wasn't. You men-... you mentioned in your book, uh, three different- Maybe I was. I don't remember. You, you mention three different, uh, times in your essay in this, uh, book, uh, In Height with Hitler, that because of his Jewish ancestry- Mm-hmm. ... you could not... there was no way you could become a Nazi. No. How would you describe a Nazi? What is a Nazi? Under certain types of Nazis. Mm-hmm. There were two reasons for me. One is my half-Jewish background and of course I didn't like it. Mm-hmm. The other one was in 1937. Mm-hmm. 19, uh... In Africa first. Yeah. They created great, uh, exhibition of what they called, uh, Antisemitism. And this was the trouble. These were my heroes. Mm-hmm. Had been my heroes all over my youth group and now they were considered to be an anti. I thought they were my heroes. But in- Idiots. I, I, I consider them to be mad. Mm-hmm. And that- These, these two reasons together made it impossible for me to become a Nazi. So in my experience with some of the men that, uh, I've interviewed- Beg your pardon? For some of the men that I've been able to document and interview, their Jewish past did not prevent them from basically following, uh, the Nazi ideology and believing in the system. Yeah. How did your Jewish past prevent you from doing that and others also? Let me think. You said your Jewish, you said your Jewish past prevented you from. Uh, not my Jewish past. The fact that by the law of the land, I was a Muslim. Mm-hmm. That explained it. Otherwise I had no Jewish past. I didn't know anything about Judaism. I didn't know anything about the Jewish religion. Mm-hmm. Or what have you. Did... Were you... Did you... Were you embarrassed about this in high school? No. How could I be embarrassed because I knew already since 1933 from my mother that they're... I did happen to be a Christian. Did... Wait. Did your brother have the same opinion, Wolfgang? I don't know. My mother had told me not to talk to, to anybody about it, so I didn't talk to my brother either. After the war, did you talk to him? After the war, yes. What did he think? Did he know during the time period? I don't recall that. I don't know. I don't know. Maybe, he may not remember after 70 years. It's really important to him. Is, um... At a time period when you and your brother were in the Wehrmacht, did your father, knowing about his Jewish past, find it strange that his two sons were serving in the Nazi military? I don't think so. I think, I think he found it, uh, comforting, because like myself, he may have felt that in the Wehrmacht we were safe. Mm-hmm. I guess that was his feeling. Mm-hmm. He could... A guess of mine. Mm-hmm. How did your father, uh, get drafted into the Volkssturm as a- Anybody was drafted into the Volkssturm. I don't know. Did, did he fight when he was in the service? No, no. Oh, don't please. Uh, running around with a.30-07. I couldn't do that. (laughs) You mentioned twice in this essay that, uh, by the military, you hardly met anyone who was, quote unquote, a Nazi- Yeah. ... when you served. Yeah. Hardly. I, I met one. One. Okay. When this was the case, how, how can you understand a Wehrmacht that hardly had anybody that you, that you met that were Nazi, how could they follow Hitler in such a loyal way? Mm. I, I think for many, many, many Germans, millions of Germans thought it was their patriotism to, uh, to wear the Nazi symbol, whether Kaiser in his personal clothes or whether they had the democratic over or whatever it is, they thought it was their patriotism to do that. To become soldiers, to die as soldiers in the same war we're in.... did, did you talk with your comrades about Hitler and the Third Reich and the ideology?" Yeah, to some degree. Yeah. Yeah. What was the similar negative about the Nazis? Among my friends in the military, friends being people of the same age who had, uh, who had been serving usually in Germany or in the years before the war broke out in Europe. I can't say that- Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Like the- No. Not like the Wehrmacht. Oh, the Wehrmacht. When I was drafted in- '37? ... '37, I was drafted to Bremen and, uh, for one year we lived together in one room with nine other youngsters of my age. Mm-hmm. Most of them either in Bremen or they were from Hamburg. Mm-hmm. All of them were coming from Germanians. Mm-hmm. And, uh, with one exception, no one believed they were Nazis. So here, how... You mentioned on page 217 that, um, on one side you were (German) deutsche patriot, but on the other side, here you are a soldier serving, uh, with, you know, the Nazi Reich. How could you separate- No. No. No. No. No. No. Separate? They didn't have the peace of the Nazis, they had the peace of the Germans. So how did people feel when they knew that Hitler was the only sales harbor for the Wehrmacht? Well, I heard of this not over the sales harbor, but the yield. They wanted themselves to be the sales harbor of the army which was, I think, during the battle of '41. Yeah. When I was in Russia, in Russian battlegrounds, I felt that this was nonsense because they didn't understand war. Mm-hmm. It wasn't my understanding. They had a different mind of it than I was suggesting. Mm-hmm. And at, at this time period, when you were an officer, you talk about how you were proud of being an officer. But, uh, on the other hand, you were- Yes, I was proud. Page 219. Uh, yeah. You said that. (coughs) I don't think I was proud. I do. You were... I understand. I know. This is something different. Yeah. Yeah. So you, you accepted it. They had asked me twice to become a professional officer and I, twice I had to just say, "No, I don't wish to do that." Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. But I had nothing against becoming a so-called wartime officer. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. In the first place, we were called Leutnant as a soldier. Mm-hmm. In the third line. Right. Later on, they changed the name to Leutnant from an KR point. Mm-hmm. O point, meaning tricks on the troops. Mm-hmm. Which I translated to wartime officer. Mm-hmm. Were you, were you proud to be an officer? No. But were you, were you proud to be a soldier at all? Not really. Why? Why? Why should I? Well, you mentioned that one time that you were embarrassed sometimes when you walked off the street because you didn't have enough medals. Yeah. That is true. So what, how- Anybody who had medals and I didn't. It's like anybody wearing jeans and I was wearing normal trousers. Mm-hmm. Um, when you were, when you were in battle, do you remember, uh, shooting down planes? Yeah. What, what was the shtiml in your battalion when you shot down planes? Were the men excited about this? Proud about this? No. It was self-defense. We had, uh, we had, uh, grave losses. Mm-hmm. Because the Russians had brought by Russian planes, the type was called 502, V-beds. Right. And later on in the Battle of the Bulge where American troops were all dead, at least 12 if not 24 planes out of the sky because we moved them after each charge. Hm. So it was self-defense. We were not proud, but, uh, rather happy to shoot down the enemy. Mm-hmm. They were our enemies. They were killing our friends so we had to kill them in order to be killed. Mm-hmm. And in 1941, when you talk about the, the offensive that Russia, that Russia opened up in December, you went over the small town called Kamensk in Russia. Yeah. And both times the Russians at war. Mm-hmm. And in this particular area, a lot is talked about how the Germans treated partisans and also Jews in this area. Do you, do you remember seeing- No. I was in the fighting troops and not in the partisan fight. Mm-hmm. I've never seen it. Mm-hmm. Never. Mm-hmm. And- And we were, we were... I was a part of the first panzergrenadier division. Mm-hmm. And we were pushing forward, being pushed back, pushing forward again from some, some, uh, some of those were being pushed back and forth. Mm-hmm. It was a constant battle with the exception of two or three weeks. Mm-hmm. When the landscape, due to rain, uh, changed into a swamp. The (?). No. No. No. No. The normal landscape, it switched into a swamp due to rain and nothing, nobody could move. Neither them or us. Mm-hmm. But otherwise, it was a constant battle. Hmm. What was your worst experience as a soldier? My worst experience was when we were put...... several members of the staff- Mm-hmm. ... to which I didn't belong- Mm-hmm. ... were ordered to... And also, myself, were, we were ordered to participate in so-called . You said the Volkskommission? Yeah. You had, uh- To learn, not witness it, but, uh- Just sit and learn? Yes, sit in- Mm-hmm. ... a large, uh, a large, uh, room. Mm-hmm, mm-hmm. Freisler? Yeah, I guess there were around maybe 200 people- Mm-hmm. ... to, uh, who were ordered to sit-in. Mm-hmm. And, uh, I was sitting one day- Mm-hmm. ... at the Volkskommission . Hmm, you, you described that after this process in your essay, that you realized what type of criminal regime- Yeah. ... you were serving. Why did you try after this, especially when you were in the West- What? Why did you try, after this, uh, experience, uh, with, um, watching Freisler and the way that he treated, uh, these men, why didn't you try to escape to the West? You, you knew that at this time period, the war was coming to an end. It never occurred to me. It never occurred to me. It's not going to happen again. So, how did you rectify knowing what type of regime- Well, I had my parents here. I had my wife here. Mm-hmm. I had family. When, when you brought, uh- My wife was pregnant at the time. Mm-hmm. When your wife found out about, uh, your Jewish past, what was her reaction? Uh, she did not find out. (chair creaking) I told her, but I don't remember when that was. Mm-hmm. She said that she came from a fam- family that was clearly anti-Nazi- Mm-hmm. ... from the beginning on- Mm-hmm. ... since the very, very first, maybe even two pages. Mm-hmm. So, I don't think she was that shocked about it. You mentioned- But I don't recall when we first talked about it. May have been during the war, may have been later on. I, I don't recall. Mm-hmm. You mentioned in 1944 that this between on one side being a German soldier, but on the other side, having this fear about someone finding out about your Jewish past and, uh, the consequences thereof. We were schizophrenic, many, many, many, many hundreds of thousands of us then, so we knew that we were to lose the war. Mm-hmm. And we knew that, uh, the end of the war was gonna be terrible. I was expecting a much more terrible situation at the end of the war than really did happen. Mm-hmm. That's what we had. We went through hell and back. Mm-hmm. Not embarrassed. Mm-hmm. But nevertheless, we fought on, most of us fought on until the very last couple of weeks. Mm-hmm. You mentioned that the com- Same thing you see, you see in Japan. You, you, you said the camaraderie was very good, uh, with your men. Yeah, yeah. And but, on the other side, you, you had, uh, a lot of fear that if one of these men found out about your Jewish past, it would not be, uh, very good for you. How, how did you rectify that? If the camaraderie was very good, would it have mattered if one of these men found out about your Jewish past? I didn't care for it. Would it, would it, would it have been something, you know, difficult for these men to take if they had found out that- They would not have cared. They would not have cared. Somebody in Hamburg might have found out about my father. Mm-hmm. In the Wehrmacht, nobody was killing them off. So, why were you scared, though, that someone would find out? Because they could have found out about my father, and this would then have repercussions for myself, for my wife, for my brother. This is what I, what I seemed to feel. I, I didn't know. I never had seen it driven during that loss. Did you ever read Mein Kampf? No, I tried it, but I found it confusing. (laughs) Now, did your brother, did he have the same experience by his? No, he ha- I think, uh, he was a non-commissioned officer. No, he was an over-le-finer, is what it is. (laughs) A mental health officer. Yeah. Mm-hmm. No, I think his experience on the Wehrmacht was not so humane. Mm-hmm. But not because his not being a Nazi, but because he had been picked rather than his superiors, which, uh, who treated him badly also. I think he had it because- Because of his background? No, no, no, no, no, no, because what is maybe free speech, free, uh, free speech or whatever. Hmm, so he was very independent like you as well? Yeah, yeah. He did not suffer from this, uh, from this, uh, Jewish background. But otherwise, did the same. Mm-hmm. Did you ever feel guilty for your, your activities in the Wehrmacht after the war? After you found out about everything that happened with the Holocaust and whatnot? No. Did you, once you found out about the Holocaust... When, when did you know about the Holocaust, by the way? First time after the war, in the main-... and I was already being offered there, but we should have been pushed back (static crackles) because they shouldn't have been attacked. Mm-hmm. I had never heard of them up there, the other units. When you heard this information, did you think, "Oh, that, that could've been my father or me?" No. I don't recall. Mm-mm. Mm. It would... Probably it would not really have mattered to me because personally my life was over. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. My life was over. Mm-hmm. And why should I, I have things to do, uh, for them to reach for me. Mm-hmm. He- But this is what I guess today. Mm-hmm. And my memory is very, just fading. Mm-hmm. You mentioned in your book that you, you did your, your duty, your bahurim tam. Yeah. And you, you even mentioned Kant. Yeah, yeah. Um, Eichmann in his trial in Jerusalem said the same thing. Uh-huh. He mentioned Kant and said, "I did, I did my duty." How would you separate these two claims, uh, from one thing that you said, which was saying that Eichmann is saying that of course it was three different situations. How, how are these two separa- situations different as far as this claim goes? I don't know anything about it, uh, claim or belief, uh- Mm-hmm. ... of, uh, what's his name? Eichmann. Oh, Eichmann. Mm-hmm. Well, using this philosophy of Kant, right? Well, this may have been told to... Uh, he may have been taught, say, that by his, uh, by his, uh, defense, by his attorney. Mm-hmm. I have no idea. Were you taught that in school when you were growing up or did they give you the news that- No, I had read, uh, some, uh, things, uh, when I was a pupil at, uh- Mm-hmm. ... a young student. Mm-hmm. When, um- And particularly I had read Marcus Aurelius. Yeah. You mentioned that you had, you had fear for someone's, uh, for the fact that someone might find out about your Jewish past. Fear for w- for what? What did you think would happen? I'm defined. Mm. I didn't know what would have happened to me. Mm. Mm. I'm fine. My mother had told me in the early 1930s that if they found out that my father was a Jewish father- Mm-hmm. ... that this would be... He would have been thrown out of the, uh, school. Mm-hmm. And, uh, it was in the door. Mm-hmm. Mm. You mentioned that this, this conception of Kriegsschuld after the war, that everyone was saying that, uh, the German people have this universal guilt is, is nonsense. Um, and my question to you is: The men who fought in the German Wehrmacht, do they have a certain responsibility to the generations who are coming up now to talk about their experiences and what... Or how, how should the German soldiers help people remember those times? Do they have a certain plea to do that? Yeah, many of them have done so. Mm-hmm. Many of them have done so. Do you, do you think men who were soldiers and with Jewish ancestry have that duty more than a- No. Any of them, any of the Germans who have lived through that period- Mm-hmm. ... in my view, have the duty to try and tell the truth. Mm-hmm. Full stop. Mm-hmm. Speaking of the, uh, Wehrmacht, did you know about Milch, Field Marshal Milch? I only had, had heard his name. Uh, did you know about his Jewish ancestry or not? I didn't know about his Jewish ancestry, wasn't anything. Except for yourself and your daughter. Yeah, yeah. So you did... did you not know Egon Bahr or any of these other individuals, Krakow, during the war? No. Mm-hmm. Um- I had no idea how many people, let's say, living in Germany were Jewish or of Jewish ancestry. Did, did you ever dream of the war- No. ... now? No. Did, did you during that time period- I'm a, I'm a very solid person, you know. (laughs) I don't dream at all. (laughs) At least not to my knowledge. All right. You mentioned that it was very dangerous to listen to the BBC during World War II. Did you listen to it? No. I technically I didn't, I had no idea how to do it, but I knew that my parents-in-law from time to time did. Mm-hmm. They seemed to have... My, my father-in-law was, was just very, very skilled at math. Mm-hmm. And he... I think, I don't know, but I think he had created for himself a radio, uh, thing by which you could, could listen to the BBC. Mm-hmm. I knew that they from time to time did, but didn't manage to make it. Mm-hmm. Did you hope during this time period at the very beginning that Germany would win the war, '39, '40? I mean, here Germany was winning all over. Oh. No. No. From the beginning of the campaign in Russia, I would say end of June '41 or so- 21st, 21st. I knew that we were losing, but, uh, I had no doubt about that. Mm-hmm. I think I've written about it. So what, what have you learned from your experiences from World War II? The whole thing is a great tragedy with regards to the experience of Germany. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. A great tragedy. They fought believing what they had to fight.... after the war and during the war, did you ever feel Jewish in any sense of the word? No. When did you, uh, wait so long to have a chance with, um, after the war, to talk about your Jewish past? Number one, there was no need to talk about it. I did talk to my grandmother who had established an alliance with my father. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Uh, but otherwise there was no need to talk about it publicly. Why should I? Mm-hmm. And secondly, and more important was the fact that as long as my father was alive, I didn't wish to unbalance him. He still was more ashamed of his, uh, Jewish ancestry. So, never bothered to address it. Though, if ever I was to talk publicly about it, I had to wait until my father died. And he didn't want to bring it up. It was very long. He just passed away? When did he pass away? He was born '88. Plus 90 would be- Seventy- ... '78, plus three years would be- '80? ... '91 or something, because he was originally in '93. How could he- '88. ... have your date? '88. Yeah, he died in '81. Yeah. He was born in '93, he was born '88. He was born '88. He died when? He died in '81. '81. Yeah, you are right. Anyway, I had to, I had to wait until my mother died. And on the other hand, there was no need to talk about it. Why should I talk about it? Not too great a situation for newspapers to report on. I, I ask many people this question, but I'm very interested to hear your answer. I ask them, uh, usually in an interview in German. (German) I already told you, I am not German. So, what made you hope to survive the war during this time period? I mean, were you scared of dying or- Any soldier was scared of being wounded or dying or getting injured. Any. But when a soldier says he was not, do you believe him? Pardon? When someone says they were not scared, do you believe them? Either I wouldn't believe them or I would think they were idiots. Hmm. So, what made you hope to continue on? Or to fight through all that happened? Not so much to fight, but to, uh, to survive. Mm-hmm. You hope to survive. That is true. Mm-hmm. Well, if you have been a soldier over so many years, you know the ways, uh, if possible at moment to survive even in a severe situation. Mm-hmm. You learn that. Mm-hmm. In Russia- Most of these, those soldiers who are getting killed are the young ones, the unskilled ones. Mm-hmm. If you were to hear the same from the, from American soldiers. Mm-hmm. Older hands would, will easier find ways to maneuver out of a dangerous situation than youngsters of 19 years of experience. Did your comrades, were they excited to go into war? No. No. So, why, why did they fight? What do you think? As I said earlier, because it was the only thing to do. It was their duty. They considered it to be their duty, like in 1915. Mm-hmm. Like in the case of American soldiers. Like in the case of the Russian soldiers, they did not know either that Stalin was a criminal. Mm-hmm. What do you remember- They found out later on only. Mm-hmm. What do you remember of Russian soldiers in, in the war in Russia? I've never met a Russian soldier in person. We were fighting over distances of several hundred meters. Mm-hmm. Sometimes more than a kilometer. Mm-hmm. Did you think when you invaded Russia after three or four months of being so deep, Leningrad and Moscow, that, uh, Germany would take over Russia? No, no, no. I believed that we were doing it for good. For what? I did expect- Mm-hmm. ... our army on Russian soil would, uh, have failures to the same fate as Napoleon's army 100 years earlier or 150 years earlier. Mm-hmm. You mentioned 1939 when Germany attacked Poland, you thought it was correct because Poland attacked, as the propaganda was telling you- I was, yeah, I was misled by the propaganda. I was, I actually believed that the Poles had, uh, attacked a, a radio station. Mm-hmm. I forgot the name of it. Leipzig. Yeah, yeah, Leipzig. Okay, yeah. Did, did most people believe that? I mean, did your family think it was correct that- I do not know. I don't know. I don't know. I think most of my friends and this, uh, militant wing- Mm-hmm. ... did really think. Mm-hmm. Although there was one exception, a number of them believed in the Nazis. Mm-hmm. In a dictatorship, you can be misled by what you are reading or what you're being told. Mm-hmm. Although you dislike the dictatorship. Mm-hmm. At least partially can they mislea- mislead you. Mm-hmm. What, what was your family's thinking in 1939 before you went to Germany and all? Only on my parents. Mm-hmm. I don't... I don't remember. I guess that their feeling was, was that...... was, was your father scared in 1939, 1940? When they invaded Germany- I guess so. I guess so. But I don't really know. I mean, we were normal citizens what happened to us there. Mm-hmm. Did your father have siblings? No. He had one, one brother, but not his, uh, not by blood, but by adoption. And he was adopted. Adoption. And there was a brother of his who was two son of the ship. Mm-hmm. He was killed in World War I. What do you think of this project that I've been doing? What do you think, uh, this historical event that is unknown, what type of meaning will it have for German history? I think it is very important that this comes out because it will shed some additional light onto (static) past. Mm-hmm. And as I said earlier and now that I'm 00000000, the truth has to be told. This is part of the truth. Mm-hmm. It is also part of the truth, of the truth, as for the Jewish people who lived at that time and want to come out. Mm-hmm. Thank you- So far, I thought, uh, my case was such a special, exceptional one. Mm-hmm. Maybe that there were a dozen others, but I didn't think of them since there are thousands or even just there are hundreds of thousands. I don't know yet. We'll find that out. But I, I- Who brought you up then? Who's the man who proposed that subject to you? My friend sent me off and I told, I told him the story. I told him, I, I told him the story. In the sense of ancient Greece. Mm-hmm. So he can send me out. Mm-hmm. You know anything about Greek history? No. As a student of history, you ought to. Mm-hmm. Well, what, what particular time period, sir? Uh, what are you thinking of? The Trojan War, or- No, no, no. Not the Trojan War. The Peloponnesian War with Thucydides, or- Yeah, yeah. The great, uh, the great period of Greek civilization, per se. Aristotle, Plato? Yeah, yeah. That's, uh, that's the fourth and third century BCE. Uh, Epictetus and- Yeah. ... Aristotle and Roman- Compedes, Herodotus, and all that. You know something about it? Did you learn it in school or at the university? Both at the university, sir. Well, you haven't heard the name of Pededes in school? Not very often, no, sir. What, what, what- Would, would, would you have heard the name of Pericles in school or Pededes? So you're luckier than most of the, of the young people in Germany. (laughs) Thank you, sir. Is there anything, um, more that, uh, you might have to say about this project or advice for your own future? Well, except that, except that what I said earlier on. Don't try to be 100% complete. There's much to understand. Mm-hmm. And you will then end up with a scientific thesis. Mm-hmm. Not just for print. Okay. I mean, maybe you have to, uh, distinguish between what you submit as your thesis, doctorate I guess. And, uh, on the other hand, put what is to be published as a book. Yes, sir. I wish that this comes out in German. Of course, yes. But not as a scientific volume with 120 footnotes. Maybe putting footnotes into an appendix. It must be readable. Mm-hmm. For normal people like myself, it must be readable. Yes, sir. Your, your colleague. What, what are you doing? I'm studying medicine. Medicine. I'm now in the seventh semester. Uh-huh. Mm-hmm. To be done. And I- Tell you what- And I did my, uh, (static) and now I'm starting to- (speaks in German) (speaks in German) Oh, in? Yes, (speaks in German). Very good. Then you get there. And, um, (speaks in German). Then, then you get there. What's the best medical school in America? Um, I do read a lot from Howard. So I- I have a, an inkling that Johns Hopkins is the best one. Would that be true? It might be. From, um, where I'm, um, new with this, I'm doing my doctorate in cardiology, and there I do read a lot of things from here. Cardiology? Yes. Is it, is it possible to get back to, uh, your study. Could I meet your brother? Is he in Hamburg, or is it possible to talk with him as well about this sometime? Yeah, I guess so. I don't know whether he would be willing. Mm-hmm. Uh- Is it all right if I use your name, sir, when I write him? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Oh, yes. His name is Wolfgang Schmidt and, uh, his address is-... it's a suburb of Hamburg. Are you sure? Uh-huh. And the address is I don't know. I know he's done a lot of stuff with, uh, the economy. Uh, the ship building. I have met him, I think, as an act- as a CEO of some type, either steel or ship building corporation. Mm-hmm. But I ... I've met so many thousands of people. (laughs) You have had a very admirable life, sir. I hope that there's still his arrest to come. Mm-hmm. Goodbye. Thank you very much. Goodbye. Good day. Thanks for that one. Okay, Herr Chancellor. (speaks German). Alles fein? Alles fein. Alles fein. Ich hoffen wir werden in der nächsten...(Video game sounds continue)