[HEBREW TRANSLATION] ... because you can't follow all the letter of the law, because it's a very tight hedge to walk. You always want to, uh, have people subject to the rules of injustice. But on the other hand, you have to sometimes, uh, do use some kinds of methods which are not completely legal. And that's how the, how the court system happens. What was your worst experience during your time at, at the work memories? Well, as far as I'm truly concerned, it was the bombings. We were sitting in the barrack there and we were hoping that those bombs would keep the air coming down, but it would go to the next house where we are. Ah. So, you're angry at the allied bombings? No. Okay. No, when they, when they came into the camp with... I went to the post office to send a package to my father and, um, the postman looked at the address I had given him and he said, "Oh, you're from Germany." He started to laugh crazy because I used to install the bombs on our behalf and really blow up the allies. So he said- And I said, "I don't know if you used the address wrong because we heard it was me." No, but it was your fault. Oh, it was? It was your fault. Yeah. You know. But it was- And when you were home, said he was, uh, your mother. What do you have? Bombs had fallen in the house and she got that part. See, uh, my mother told us a story later on. She said, "They were telling us stories at the dining hall about the camp and there was a dog running around in the neighborhood always, you know, doing something like that." But then one day, they were sitting down because it was too sad inside. My mother came in the area and said, "I heard this story, I heard this story." And there was an article some old piece of news source. My mother met the dog and was running around. (laughs) Then they called this dog a Hunch and they called the other piece of news source a Schariehund. Now, did you... When you were in the camp, the OT camp right there, uh, did you talk amongst each other about Hitler and the Third Reich and so on? Oh, we didn't believe in the Third, Third Reich. Uh, but, uh, before we all, all thought why don't we take a trip to our parents' house now that we're free. But anyway, yeah, they took us to visit my birthplace. Yeah, the place where his father worked. That's right, yes, that's correct. Because I had a birthday while I was in OT camp, and, uh, in the room was a fellow, somebody, I don't know, he was there with another little boy playing property with air, and a little, somebody read me a poem. Mm-hmm. And part of the poem was, "Up and up, forward, and then going to the sun comes down, and he's dying, and he would have wished that he could see more than he can have, and so he says to himself, 'The boy, I will let those boy, and then the others are as fine.'" And after he said how many, I don't know if people now know how much that child, gray be there. (laughs) I should tell you that. Now, was, was it hard labor at this, this camp? Well, it wasn't hard labor, but for the young people, that was hard work. You know, people- So, were you fed well? Okay, we had some older people going over from time to time. But were you fed well? Uh, we were fed very well. Yeah. Were, were people beating you? No. Now, you mentioned this one man who committed suicide because he thought it might be very, you know, murderous there. Yeah. Were there other people who were killed or, um, committed suicide? No. And so, were you... Were the guards that were watching you, did you have... I mean, you said it was very rude. You said it was safe. Yes. But not... Did anybody try to escape? No. Well, yes, I did nearly once. Oh. Once. I'll tell you, the American, he said... You know what he had said? He said, "I'm getting tired of serving here all the time. I'll get myself another job." So, he went there for the leader of the group, he's one of the guards there and said, "You know what? I'm going to get you a newspaper." And every day, he got excused to go down, get the newspaper. It took him half a day, (laughs) he walked behind the newspaper. Every day, he said, "Just two words per line." (laughs) Didn't he tell you that? Uh, this, this leader of the camp? Not the leader of the camp, but, but he was working at the camp because these people, you know, they all turned into work horses by the last thing they had known that they got the brains for that. Did you see a lot of... did a lot of jets operate when you were, uh- No. Not at all. Never seen it? Never seen it. So, no planes came in when you were... because you were bombed by the Allies. Yeah, because when the... When I called France, I didn't even... they called me but (French) (laughs) Looking back, do you wish instead of being in the camp, you'd been in the mil- military or no? No. No? That's what I said, they made a mistake. They put me in the military. Yeah, but would your dad know? Now, when you were a soldier, when you were walking around the streets of Berlin with your uniform, you knew your dad was Jewish, and, you know, you knew you were happy, were you kind of proud to have that uniform? I wasn't, but my father was. Your father was proud of you? Yes. The only problem was that I was at least like a private, not a, a sergeant or a corporal. (laughs) Did you walk around the streets with your Jewish father in his uniform or? Yeah, sometimes. So, he took pride in that? No, he didn't. Yeah, you didn't have- He went to the war sometimes. Sometimes he did, too. And did you ever feel... So, you never felt a sense of pride coming into a military career? No, no way. Because his dad was a military person. Never, never... In contrary to her, she's still likes what her family is very much. But another peculiar thing. When we came to this country, from Australia, there are couples, you know, there are couples who are also Aussies. Mm-hmm. And we got to meet them, uh, this country, Australia, Germany, we, we had no people. My mother, she didn't know because she met them in the military. Because they spoke German with the- They spoke German, and so that's how they recognized them. Yeah, they recognized. And they're the oldest children now. Now, he doesn't talk to them anymore. But we talked to them. (laughs) I said they were, they were Nazis. He looked them in the eye and said, "That's the problem." So, why were you sent to this country? Because he has a nice wife. (laughs) (laughs) And was your partner- If your wife was, if your wife was, it's not enough, you may get along with them. But you have to get the wrong guy. So, they party... Was he a party member? Yeah. Was he in the military-... no, that's stuff that I wouldn't do. But, uh- Yeah, he didn't hide the shell casings or anything like that. But yet, uh, uh, with these people, did they know about your Jewish background? Oh, yeah. And how were you behaved? You're so obnoxious. Well, I didn't think it was special. I just said what you did on the floor for me is not fair. Well, they didn't think you were different because you passed away from a heart attack or a heart... How long were you in the military for? I think I was in there a little bit longer, maybe a year or so. It must have been after the other one. When you were out of the force. And with what rank were you? I never felt that way. You know, I was a soldier. You were the... Did you think the African Corps was different than other army units? No, I didn't really know. Was your detail Jewish? Was your, is his mother or father Jewish? Uh, my mom was Jewish. And didn't his mother die in Auschwitz? I don't think she died in there. I don't think she died. She was divorced. She never knew her son after. She married a farmer from Croatia and they lived in Croatia. That's where her family was. And did, uh, Han have any relatives or brothers that are in the military or friends? No, not that I can think of. He went to, he went somewhere and then they married and had too much. That's why they left town. They came back with too much. Now, uh, Han Beckler was remarried? Yeah. Is his wife still there, alive? Yeah. Do you think she's interested in learning a little bit more about him? If she was, she wouldn't call you an idiot. Call her on it. Do you think she has kids? No, she's good. Good. Did they have children? Yeah. Uh, once they made something from there. I will be in Berlin, uh, in a few months. Is there any way I could ask you to write a letter on my behalf and tell them- Where do you stay there? Well, last time I was staying in the Admiral Hotel. Who paid for it? Oh, that was a different team. (laughs) This time I just got a room. Oh, okay. And what year was this? What year was this? About, uh- Uh- But I don't see anything. I don't see anything. No? Okay. And, uh, and when he was in this, uh, camping well, did he have, uh, a different impression of the camp? Was he scared? 'Cause he- He wasn't that scared. He was, uh, similar like me, only he didn't have much with us anymore. That's why he made the note there and put soap on the ground. Well, I don't know if he, in, in that, in time, he probably worried about people spying, that he was a spy. But he had friends there. Don't worry. He told me, "I'm not going to spy. I'm going to stay over here with my friends." And of course, the kids knew. And he wanted to tell this, like us. He said, he said, "I don't care if I am a spy or what." He said, "I don't care." (laughs) Has your son known that you're, that you're a spy? Yeah. Did it mean anything to him? No. It didn't mean anything. It's just normal at some point. You know? Did you have any contact with any of your military comrades after the war? No. No? What about the guys you know of who survived? The guys time apart? There were still the allies. Yeah. But, uh, the brown- That's how everybody was treated. ... as long as he was covered, he had a body, brown skin, there they are. (laughs) Do you consider yourself a victim of the Third Reich? Not really yet, because I couldn't get to any camp after. Because somehow, I did, during the crash, I heard that St. Louis had been liberated. So I was in this part of Germany was over, you know, and they kind of looked after us, us Jews. So, uh, I don't know. I didn't get a chance to leave. Plus, I couldn't even type when I wanted. I have to use what was called an Ume Kuta device. It's not that good. Have you ever considered yourself a, a perpetrator in, uh, during the military? No, I didn't do anything. (laughs) What about, uh, in Poland? Did you ever see any of the battlefields or- No. No. There's nothing to show for that, seeing battlefields. It was mostly, uh, they bombed it one day and then we were forced the next year, and then we went to... And I've seen these people go there and find houses burned and things like that. That's about it. Did you see any of the news in Poland, the Orthodox Jews? No, of course not. They were all fucked up there. (laughs) Was you, was you hearing about any of the shootings or the ghettos or concentration camps during the war? Not at that time. Only after the war? Only after the war. Yeah. Did you find... Were you given any press signs that were good for you or did you learn to read suddenly you were guaranteed? How do you know it's good? Because obviously there's nothing dangerous. You're not going to see what's behind such a girl to get any news because everybody was afraid. If you talk to her a little bit, "You know, we don't want to be in trouble." So that's why we had no news about all this. At least sometimes they're mumbling and telling rumors, but never nothing. They were so amused that they didn't take notice. Did you ever understand what they were saying? Understand what they were saying? There wasn't even telephones back then. Oh, that's true. Of course, the Polish people lived in the house, always lived with them. That's where they stayed. That's where they lived. That's how they knew. Did you ever have to call for them? No, they never called for us. They never had to call for you? No. They didn't know about such an office? No. You didn't either? No. We weren't even born. You could tell they were there but- You didn't know about it? ... we didn't know. Did you ever pray back then? Did you- I never prayed. No, but you go to church? Well, last time I went to church was in '45 years ago. Oh, okay. And did you go to church back then when you were a soldier? Yes. Yes. What do you think God thinks of the Holocaust and the Third Reich? (laughs) Well, isn't that what they got? We had some, you know, 16-year-old good and evil here. They must have had a purpose of doing it. And I'm satisfied because I've been playing them when they were (laughs) serious about it. It is really interesting about the Holocaust because there would have been overpopulation just because of the Nazis. (laughs) There was none. Now...... remember it now, right? I don't remember. You just said you don't believe in God? Well, not in the way, uh, that one believes. I believe there must be something which created the whole thing. You see, according to the story that happened before, but I am more of a... I'm more scientific mind and not the, um, I mean, I'm the evolutionary type of person so I do accept the question. But there must be something and that is probably what God is, you know. Mm-hmm. But I don't think, whatever God is, if he's a creator and all that, I don't think he has done this just for the pleasure of it. He has some insurance of good deeds out in the universe. That's what I think. Hm. (laughs) You know, he won't notice even you. (laughs) (laughs) Um, so with, uh, yeah, what... how do you make sense out of your, your experience in the, in the sense that you didn't see all these things that, that you saw, you learned after the war? You didn't feel any evil, uh, during the Third Reich? I mean, you said there all these, uh, times at speeches saying we're going to exterminate the Jews and, and yeh, yeh, yeh. Yeah. And c'est un gros truc. W- What were you thinking? What he also means that Hitler can't go to comfort her, you see, with this cooperation. You see? So in other words, he took this up again now. Is that what you're saying? No, no, no. He thought he may have happened but he didn't know how much and so on and so forth. It was thousands. Uh, but you know, sometimes, how can you stand up against the whole world? That's stupid. That's true. Not, not only were the Germans, it was also in England. Did they say the same thing? No. He said, "Oh, I don't like all the... (pauses) I don't like them to stay." He said, "I don't want that shit." So after that he left. (laughs) Anyway, uh, whatever, what he learned at school- What he learned in school was rather, uh, they said, "Wehrmacht good." Wehrmacht. That's the Wehrmacht was. And she had to cut out the pictures out of the newspaper, the, the, the songs of Hitler and... I don't know what song of Hitler I don't know. He said they are gone. They don't want the songs. Have the songs, yes. Oh, no. Because they were Nazi songs. Oh, yeah. They said the Nazis were really bad. Did they say this is... Oh, here in A- America? I, I thought that some people before said, you know, CIA and FBI and everything, that a lot of these, um, you know. But they are intelligence, uh, very, uh, inventive men, good people maybe and they get away and Hitler got away with all these things, but he wasn't a German, first of all, you know. (laughs) Mm-hmm. And maybe he wasn't very good. After some weeks, there were rumors that he was, uh, an injurer and he would fight, but I don't know if it's a group or a rioting or if he... I don't know about that. I don't remember that. But it may be the case that he wanted to show them he was different. Mm-hmm. Did you ever hear any of his speeches? Oh, yes. Did you hear it? Yes. What did he say? "Oh, I am not a blood lover, so I am going to cut out your eye, eye." (laughs) And nothing, nothing happened to the people there, nothing is lying, but it has got a political idea that something you need to sign on to. I have to tell you, if somebody tries to yell at me in a speech, I say to him, "You know, it's nice if you put it in your face, but not yell it, right?" Mm-hmm. Because you don't think about it, because the other thing, so the whole thing is, uh, I have something to talk about. So did you come to America because you wanted to get away from Germany or- Yes. No, no. See, I had a good job in Germany and I loved the job, but, uh, Hitler was there and Reichsfuehrer, I don't know. What do you mean by Reichsfuehrer? Um, um, mayor of my... mayor of my town. Well, yeah. Mayors were pretty big. They had lots and lots to happen. Yeah, there was when I'm still, still young. But now because of the Jews past and the Nazis- Uh, you mean health. You mean the KKK mentality, if you don't like the mentality, if you don't, you know, wish that the Nazis come to power now, would that be the same? It wasn't only the Nazi people, it was probably all the other language they said, which is really nasty. But I used to read that. That's why I say, I don't like to talk to people my age. I like to talk to the younger ones. Yeah. Oh, tell you. (laughs) After the war, when you started figuring out, finding out what Hitler had actually done, did you start getting angry? Why? Because he killed an alien. Who killed an alien? I don't know why they thought they didn't have anything, we don't have to have aliens. Did you try to get... You mean, get your, uh, upset, uh, passport card, your, your identification that you were a victim of? Yeah. Did you get reparations after the war? Yeah. For that, for your own true time? Well, for true time, yes, because three months in prison for this, you know. And my mother followed through with this more because she stayed in Germany and she gave somebody a place to give some money because I couldn't stay here. They say, "You pay 400." And do you think your father would've lived longer had it not been for the Nazis? Yeah. Did that ever make you angry that he had to pay for it? Mm-mm. Made you mad? No. Did you try to document that after the war and get retribution for him? No, this was all my mother. She tried to fight for me. I was, uh, I was too small at that, you see? So, do you think the government did enough after the war for your family? I think they did as much as could be expected because they had all these bills to live on. Our food during the '70s was quite bad right after the war. It was very difficult and it was very hard to manage. Do you ever go through? Not really. He likes going to the beach with me. Yeah. But I don't think every day he goes to the beach with me. Are you both very proud to be Americans? Oh, yeah. Uh, do your friends and family over there, do they wonder why you came over and... Uh- Of course, most of your family was already... No, I have one cousin. I got married and then we lived right together in the house when we were divorced and '91 or '72.... no. Because I wondered whether I could've thrown it off of a tree and then we, then we get to keep it into there. Yeah, yeah, mommy, Mommy took out all the pencils in the house and she called us bad words. (laughs) But luckily we were girls because we didn't have weapons, we didn't have weapons. We were just lucky kids. Mm-hmm. Did you remember that? Oh, yeah. Hmm. So was that, uh, a great experience with the other kids? Yes, ma'am. Did you still go to school? Yes. Right on. What about the rations? Ah. Oh, the rations, my mother had. Hmm. They did a search on us then- Mm-hmm. ... when we were turning up in the summer, in the vacancy. And, uh, we all had to stand along the wall, and then they searched us and they took our watches, if they saw the jewels, and they took the women if they wanted. Oh, it was scary. Many, many... Then we all had to leave the house and go, uh, in the yard. There was a yard in front, and we had to stand in a circle with these Russians, watch with their guns, and I said to my mother, "They are going to shoot us now." She said probably- You mean they were very worried that you'd throw a fit? ... "Oh." Yeah. (laughs) It was frightening. I can kind of imagine it was terrifying. It was frightening. Did you experience the rations again? No. Not the only reason others were cut off from food? Some of these people invaded me. They made us stay on top of a mountain, high. Ooh, it's a well on the top of the mountain. You don't want to go up on the mountain. But anyway (laughs), now, um, right at the end of the war, I decided that I was going to visit my mother again. Mm-hmm. Nobody knew this. I went to Berlin by train, visited my mother, and I went over there. And then I arrived on the outskirts. I wasn't with my mother. I wasn't going to invade anybody's house. If I invaded their country, their country was invading mine. Yeah. Was I in your mother's? No. And there was a border right there. And, uh, (laughs) I snuck them out. I took a suitcase with me which some threw together here and there, but nevermind. The others they completely threw away the stuff. Well, they one day asked my name. Said, "Who are you?" I said, "I'm Margot from over there." My brothers and sisters are all dead, so I'm Margot. My father said, "How do you look like Margot?" I said, "No, no, I went back-" Oh, you visited your brother? Yeah, a little bit, 'cause where I lived at, it's very underground, so I went back. So I went up on that mountain again, and nobody noticed that I was gone. (laughs) By that time, the English came and they thought the, uh, English air raid had been finished. No, no, no. It was the British who brought the war to America. We started a fight with the Americans. And I had to get out with my suitcase. And this guy points a gun at me, and took my suitcase. (laughs) The English thought it was a war, and I explained to him, he went, "Don't matter. I don't have a gun or..." (laughs) Now he went on, took all the stuff that I had attended by the, and afterwards, uh, you know, I made as many attempts to get some of those few people to put anything they had down before I killed them. (laughs) Now, when you were in the camp with the other athletes, do you remember any guys being, uh, highly decorated soldiers? Anybody wear their medals or- Were there any officers there that were happy, that you remember? Were any, anybody else besides the athletes, any victims of criminalization? Any of the rations? Oh, yes, yeah. I remember more. I can't remember. They have prison now. So that's only 60% occurred, but it's been 35, 35 years. Yeah. So you were, you were amazed that your circumcision never became a topic? Yes. That when you know that- Yeah. Yeah. ... even if the men that you, you know, showered weapons on, did they ever ask you? No. What's wrong with you? No. Nobody ever asked. Never. But you were conscious that that might be a- I was. I had a prepared answer. (laughs) See? But nobody ever asked. (laughs) (laughs) Because of me, uh, transport to- As is from Europe or Australia, uh, there was nothing public sector, so people could join, but you had to obligate yourself to work for three years and then double for another three years. And so, but we had no problem with the UN, with the UN. No problem with ITU. We have an entire system created, no problem. So when we got over there, it wasn't like that at all. So the first thing that you go through, you have to do a camp of course, and then into a, uh, where you are sent to harvest grapes. To harvest grapes can be a very lovely thing if it's in the winter time around Germany, but not in Australia where they have 105 degrees, 105 degrees, uh, temperatures. Mm-hmm. And so, but we did it. And once we get ourselves accustomed to the way they play favorite, we will make up our two years, and then leave for America. Hmm. So then again, uh, after the harvest went over, they, they took us to the agency in Georgia City. Mm-hmm. And this was good because we got good funding of course. They gave you guys money? Very, very, uh, quite a bit. Anyway, then we applied for a visa to the United States. Did you used to ever have trouble with Australia and US if you were German veterans? No. Were they ever after you? Yes. Given an award? I didn't know it. Yeah. They only thing is that they thought all the doctors who work on the grapes on the growers- In Australia, yeah. ... and, and the, the working people that came into the field. No. They didn't understand you. So I had to do the interview from Germany, from, you know, in America. But anyway, we went to the American consulate and here is the twist of it, one of them took forever and ever interviewing, because his quota, the German quota was filled already. We had to wait for an opening. There was a quota for Germans who came from the Pacific areas which was 100 a year, and that was never filled. So we got a visa right away. And, um, uh, 500, uh, or 500, $500. Uh, they opened a bank account for you, and then they give you some liquidated because there was money still left in the bank. Left in the bank? Yeah, left over. So yeah. (laughs) They go through this, "Well, you know, you have $500, 500 dollars, don't you think you're doing very well?" (laughs) He said, "But you have a good job as well as we have given you." (laughs) So when you got in, you came in as an airman, and that's what you did? Yes, I was focused, and I was a member of the engineering assistant group. And Australia-... I was looking for a job. Mm-hmm. And I was looking for jobs in America, but I couldn't get anything. Why? Because everything here is connected to the government. (static) So here I was ready to go to the United States of America. Then an attorney friend sent me to a non-government firm that started as a private company. And, uh, I went there and the man gave me a test, a simple test, and I passed it. So I got hired. I got hired as a technician and I worked for one of the senior most people in the company. (laughs) Mm-hmm. And then after I left there, I moved to Montebello. Coughing]. Moving into his own company. Yeah. That's right. And then after a while I moved to Cleveland, Ohio. And then after that I moved to Austin, Texas. After all these years. (laughs) You made that happen. Well, I moved out from here 20 some years ago. You did well some time since you were here. Yes. Of course, I missed my children. Of course, I missed my wife and children. Of course, I missed my home. But I didn't miss my work. As much as I could, I worked like a dog. (laughs) Did your father ever think about coming over? No. He only came and visited here because we were here. 'Cause he wasn't afraid to go in a country and visit the streets by himself. (laughs) His, his wife, uh, lived here too? No, ma'am. So only Ernst was somebody who moved out there? Ernst, yeah. But Werner's mother also lived here, too. Yeah. Werner's father. Werner's, Werner's mother used to live- Yeah. I'm sorry. Did he tell you about the death of his father? I'm sorry, can you repeat the question? Of his father? Did he tell you about- I'm sure he did, but I don't... It's not coming to mind. Oh, that's all right. We won't press you then. No, no, I, I will not use anything against him. Okay. Thank you so much. Have a nice day. You as well. Thanks. They went everywhere in the book. Australia. They had their friends in Sydney and they took a tour. They took a call from Sydney all the way until the call came through. When he came near to United States, he came by train first. He ended in Portland, Oregon. And he got on a call there. And, uh, the number, it took 10 seconds for New York to call. After he called us over and asked for, uh, the operator got on the end and said, "I'm sorry it took so long to make the connection." (laughs) After Australia, there was nothing. You know, looking back on your life that it didn't, the time you said right now, do you think that's a coincidence? No. Something happened before that still happens and, uh- You just make it up as you go along? No, no, no. Starting from the east at first, at that time. Uh, and then he called and he said he was moving and all these kind of things. And he said he was staying with his parents in America. Mm-hmm. But he hadn't spent that much time in America. So there was something rather odd about this. The only thing which is amiss is what would have thought that he would have spent the same period of time. Why didn't I stay longer? Why do you think he stayed in Germany for nine months? Uh, I got interested. They got good roads and buses. And the colleagues are friendly. You know, friends are important, friends are very important. (laughs) And then, Germany, they moved because of the power and some fear, I should say. And people were very tired. You know, Germany for a second, when they finally recovered, they did it with a couple of states. Not with the whole country. Mm-hmm. Not with the whole country. And, um, after a while, of course, they realized they were making a mistake and, um, who was he... He got this disease or something. And they got rid of him also. You lost an ambassador. Yeah. Well, what, what... If, if, if any people called me an ambassador, they thought that was a problem. Mm-hmm. When you're in Berlin, Germany, the people say, "How you doing" in America. Some of them act-... to be (coughs) yourself a faith. Mm-hmm. (coughs) So- (laughs) Now, uh, uh, how do you describe yourself now? As far as, you know, when you were younger, you described yourself as German and Christian. How would you describe yourself now? Well, I would say American human. American human. A human American. A human American or an American human, I'm not sure which. (laughs) But one of these humans. Yes. You are all human. Mm-hmm. And what would you say is, uh, your best success story, uh, through the years? Well, we've always had a good sense. We've had happiness in it. People have still got a little bit of enjoyment out of it. The sense of happiness- Mm-hmm. ... and well-being, I think, at this point of time, is there a better place? It's, uh, remake out of the life what you want to be. That's the, that's the thing. It got so high that everybody's life has possibilities to enjoy advancement and everything over, uh, uh, uh, period. But is it a sense or is it just really happening? I don't know. In other words, I don't know many other ways. (laughs) Do you have hope for mankind that it can, can, can anyone better itself? Um, no. Because eventually everything is going to expire with the building. You see, nothing but surviving buildings, uh, before- Nothing lives on anything except the memories. No, and that is a state of, um, uh, but one thing is that, uh, looking at history, America is at that point where other civilizations have gone down because they are (clears throat) very somewhat nothing in comparison with us. They're still, uh, they're still, uh, let me put it this way. They're still at that exit stage where they watch us and they think they're so much smarter than us. But at this point in their evolution, we will have gone down and also they are not prepared (clears throat) to, to send us off the face. No, of course, we have learned that from the past, but they have nowhere ready to test us, because they want to invent themselves for their own future. And we see they are having this idea about the boy or some ideas about the girl. Then they want to have a race for them. Next thing you know, we went to, uh, we were creating our own kind of an idea. What is error? What is genius? We don't want to invent. They want gadgets. That's the whole game. But for them, that is it. Yeah. Have you, uh, have you been to the Middle East at all? 'Cause you have worked, uh, for the CIA somewhere and you have been to Morocco. Yes, I think so. But, uh, you, you think with intelligence we're going to get better with time. How is that going to happen? Well, uh, we will eventually, um, uh, suppress people who are either lower intelligence or lower color and we'll be left out of it, I think. In my personal creation, of course, America will be selected. Uh, let's face it, when the Arabs, uh, had the, uh, uh, race of Europe and they all were actually very superior, if you consider that they are better most of the time, not only through their armor and energy and their, and, uh, and the others, whether it's military or other types. Mm-hmm. And now we are the better type. Mm-hmm. So then Europe adapted this to science of the very least because of competition and then, uh, you know, uh, arrogance. And Europe knew they could copy however much more Americans are doing, Germans and Japanese are doing, so on and so forth. Well, not so far as I'm concerned. (laughs) (laughs) I mean, being that you're an officer in Germany, do you, do you think you were able to set an example for your children? I said, uh, I thought I would, yeah. Because already by my being there, it also proved that we were a star. That's what they told you? Yeah. No, no. No, no, no, no. I, I definitely was never because of me. It was because of you. Because without you, we wouldn't be a star. Mm-hmm. Every portfolio has got me. Have you found to be why, uh, even, uh, a son of a military dad wasn't always seen as the reason why you didn't have to wear a star? No, no. That's because he had a sentiment of truth. Mm-hmm. Not the, uh, the sentiment other than he was customer, for example. You know, he wanted to make sure he comes to success and of course he did. But he wanted to make sure he liked it because he could. (laughs) And, uh, and, uh, and everything was perfect there. Now, did you, um, when you were discharged, did you say, "Oh man, I'm not gonna be able to help my father anymore?" Uh, yeah, that crossed my mind, but, uh, I think I was a person that learned a lot from it because I totally showered. (laughs) (laughs) I, I took several real good lessons from it. Mm-hmm. Which you did, of course. Mm-hmm. I could not go back with my father, of course, I couldn't. I said no way can we go. When you said in Poland, you were given weapons that you really didn't want to use, what, what did you do? Did occupy there? Yes. First of all, I... It wasn't like they said, "Hey, pass the torch and pass the torch," you know, the first few who took that immediately. But then once the war began, what did you do? This was before the war began. Oh, right after the war began. When we lost touch with Poland, we passed the torch. Yes. They left, uh, everybody from there on to someone to go. But the Polish person I know of the people that we see in order to live. Now, now to plan, why was it similar then? Did you feel like a fence going? Or I guess you wanted France to run off. Only half and half of it. Okay. And did any, did you, any, uh, plans? You know, basically I said that, "Let me roar at Boston." (laughs) Boston. I said, "Oh, you think that's it?" You went technically for quite quite some time.... so it was a good job. But my job was there to, uh, uh, create the, um, communication infrastructure for the United States and- Oh, but, uh- ... uh, did the main thing here, you connected via telephone. Right. You could connect by walking wires, but there was no electricity. That must have been hard work. But the camaraderie was good? Yeah. Did you enjoy your time in the military? As a boy? Yeah. Did you feel, before the military, did you feel kind of ostracized from society? No. No. They just... Uh, some friends. I saw them from time to time. They wrote stories to me. You know, nobody paid much attention. I went to a school in Berlin, a public school, 30 hours. Look, uh, they had the, uh, Institute for Jews, the modern name is Yad Vashem. Had that same institute here. Of course, we didn't get the money for it like they had in Europe. They didn't? No, in Germany, uh, after the, uh, after the war. (clears throat) So anyway, after the population of Jews was killed, we were, you know, living without any problems. True, true. There never were any Nazis. It was kind of- Stupid. Mm-hmm. Nowadays... NowadayS it's stupid to hide things. But here, it was, uh, we didn't do anything. We didn't go. Why didn't we go? Because we weren't ever outed. We didn't want anyone to think we're Faroeers. We didn't forget anything. We didn't go. Then again, your brother, Friedrich, he was pretty wicked. Yeah. That was, when we really couldn't get, uh- Rudi. ... I mean, when Rudi couldn't get, uh, when Rudi couldn't get an exemption to stay with, uh, to join some such group. I don't know why they didn't go to Africa. That was one of, we made a mistake. Yes. We did, and now she is the author. (laughs) Yeah. (clears throat) Did you grow really close to our Goren brothers, Victor and Emiliano? What kind of questions? Do you know Pohl, uh, Pohl within the military? Pohl? P-O-H-L? You said... You talked about him when we were sitting down at, over at Sitdown at Terry's. You said another guy used to run around in the military. Of course. Right. Yeah, he wasn't in the military. Yeah, he was a doctor or something. Huh. And do you know what he did in the military? No idea. I don't even know what the job is anymore. All right. Was he in the LTU camp with you? No. No. What, was he ever- I lost contact with him in, uh, only met him, uh, every few years. I met him when he came to, uh, to German, to sign an offer I had signed with the cross, uh, with the Germans in (laughs). Of course. (laughs) Oh, yeah. Yeah. Were you, are you a Jew? Partly. All right. You want me to sit on this chair? Uh, well, I'm not going to sit on your chair. Why would I want to? It's very, very- Here, have a, have a seat then. It's very neat. (laughs) Thank you very much. So, uh, you know, at the time it was quite the problem that we would never meet people. Why wouldn't you meet people? You didn't believe in the Holocaust? No. Why? I don't know why. I'm not sure why. Of course, I remember we were created concentration camps, all of you. Yeah. Then it was taken over and made a state. And made into states. Yeah. Good for you. Yeah. And all your comrades were not Jews, right? Sure. No? Not at all. None of them. They, were they in the reforms? No, they were not. Some people said they don't see that much because they were, uh, they were a little too serious or so on. They just... If anybody wanted to go over there (clears throat), they don't need us. It wasn't over. Nobody really knew somebody. That's, that's the way it was. Okay. They had more or less symbols of Judaism. Those who survived are no good. The sad part is that, uh, I have a higher education than most of them, but they were never able to make it. And you said your father's parents rejected him for marrying a non-Jew... I mean, having had him for marrying a non-Jew. You can say that. Uh, not my father, but my father's brother. Mm. He married a non-Jew. But my grandfather also didn't like that my father married a non-Jewish girl. But then, as it seemed they, with my family they supplied lots of confidence and everything. We had a room there and everything we needed. And then, as it got on later, we weren't very good to her. Oh, right. Yeah. But what about your mother's parents? Were they upset that she married a Jew? No, they said that they don't care. Yeah, but we got used to it. They had a divorce? They died before. Oh, they died before she was born. My parents married with, uh, lots of expenses (clears throat) and my, uh, grandmother on my father's side died in 1922 from diphtheria. And then my father had to get her over here in 1940. So, your mother worried about your father- Yeah. ... during, during his early life? Oh, yeah. And you think she ascribed very much in your warrior? Yeah, not as much as I would say for her. They also wanted boys. My mother didn't want a girl. Now, it- I think she always asked why. Did people try to encourage her to divorce your father? Uh, not directly, but in the end, she... Some people divorced and some people said, "Back off." They weren't really set their heart on it. They were only trying to help. (clears throat) And so- Amongst her father? Did you know his response? No. But, uh, you know, she stuck to them because, you know, some called her a racist or an antisemitic. Did they lose a lot of friends when Hitler came into power because they were mixed marriages? Did you lose any friends when Hitler came into power because you were Jewish? Well, I had only a few before that. (laughs) I had nothing left. So nobody, uh, treated you... Uh, what were your... Did you have any, um, forward friends because, because you did have to jive with Jews? I didn't have any problems with Jews. The only thing is, is that sometimes I had to fake certain things for them if they ask me, "Are you Arab?" And then I'm a high schooler. "What are you doing?" Don't think your military papers ever see wrote down? With your ID card now? I, I think I, but never been asked. I still get to meet them. They ask for this, they ask that. Sometimes they'll ask a Jew girl she has an eye patch. I said that they are Arab. What about it? I don't know." Now, ultimately, did you make any friends? Oh, yeah. Ultimately, I always had a friend. In fact, you'll see a copy of it in, in the book. There is a copy of it and a standard ID card there. You know, and it just says Arabic. So there's different st- there's two different types. So it was always... You only go down to Reichsbürger if it was on, if it was on any sort of a- Yes. ... form.... and Eva. Me, and Eva, and some other friend of mine. We were worried that this kid had been abducted. And wished she was dead. I wasn't worried. I wasn't against it at all. Oh. So, you, you didn't advocate for him because he was against the law? No. He was a really good guy, that girl. She must've made some peace. I'm sure I felt much better when most of that time. (laughs) Did you know about his recessive arm? Yes. Um, why did everybody think there were problems with her, because she asked you? Yeah. Because you didn't tell her? Mm-mm. Oh, so you just broke up because of normal, um- Yeah. ... things? Yeah. Oh, and the bomb raid? Yeah. Was, were you nervous when you first started becoming, you know, close to her about your joint past and you were always against the law and then she- Yes. 'Cause, well, that's what you do. You're afraid of that kind of thing. So, you didn't talk to her about this at all? No. No, not until I went to California and she was four blocks from me. She lived far. Far. Oh, 'cause you hadn't told her until then. Right. Because you were worried that you might object to it then. Right. Uh, and, and may I have some money? What, now? Yeah. No. I don't want you near Corinne. Corinne is great. My mother was right. (laughs) I actually looked like her when we were little. (laughs) And how did she respond when she said, "Why are you out of America?" Well, uh, I asked her, I said, "Why don't you come visit me more?" She said, "No, I don't need to visit you." That's my mother. Really? On the phone. Were you surprised at such a reaction? Yes. Because that's probably a rare reaction. Yes. Yes, yeah. I mean, she doesn't say it like that. I'm not saying that's the way it is with everyone. But, uh, no, never heard of it. Did, did either of you? Oh, yeah. I knew I was seeing her friends. Thinking that you were happier? Yeah. Before this beginning? Oh, yeah. Yeah, yeah. First name? Kolaitoai. And last? And Kolaitoai is K-O-A-I-T-O-A-I-A-I. Oh, okay. Great. Uh, well, how old were you then? I turned 19 in 1940. Oh, fuck. (clears throat) 1924. I can't remember. Well, 40 then. Wow. And, uh, got back married? They said, they said he remarried. I think he did. And you couldn't get back down there anymore? No, couldn't. I couldn't. And were you both late at Mass on Sunday? Well, I wasn't, but that old one (laughs). Now, what about her father? Was he nervous about this? Not really. Not really. You know, I think some people, they're against now peace and joy with things because- They want to take it all for themselves. ... they don't, you know, most of us are for common. What about her mother? Oh, she wasn't the best. Uh, she died of cancer. I was very good friends with her. So, she had- We were even good friends with Eva, as her mother. Oh, but after- But after, after she had died. And then I became good friends with Eva and she used to send over some blood or give some products of her garden or something. Now, how was the, how was the guy? Was he working in building? Was that hit by a direct hit, or in a bombing raid, or? No, it was hitting in open field. Open field? Yeah. It was a Peco. Yeah. You know this girl? No, I don't know who that is. He died in a Peco. Oh, Peco. Yeah. Oh, away from here. It was far away from here. It was quite a test. She was, uh, I don't know how she stuck it through. (coughs) It was somewhere outside Calgary, and I would see her every day. They'd form these groups and they'd buy- Do you like her? Sure. Okay. You know, she writes to me and everything. Oh, so she writes to you and everything? Yeah. We write to quite a bit of others. No, I didn't know she wrote to you guys. I, I didn't know either. Oh. I never talked to her. (clears throat) Back when they were, you know, when you were in back at Berlin and there was a lot of moppers, did you know that there was a lot of moppers? No. So, only when ODs did you come together with a whole lot? No. And how was, uh, con radiators different from anyone you know? (clears throat) Well, they were just an age group. They, they were in their 30s and 40s. In their 30s. Yeah. Oh. Would you say the majority were your age group, though, 20 to 30? Uh... (laughs) Yeah. I think so. I think so. Some were older. Some were older than 30. Yeah. Some were in their 40s. So, the con radiators were mainly kids and kids? Yeah. And it was the same type of unit, like the size amps and stuff? Well, I think they all used (clears throat) to use the ones I got, the ones I got back then. I got bigger amps now. Yeah, that's something- (instrumental music) Did you know a Heinstouw from the past? No. Not related. In fact, I thought he was a Touw. A Heinistouw. Oh, he was a Quicker as well. That's right. I know. Of the Heinistouws. Oh, yeah, the same family. Not Heinistouw. You have a brother, an Otto Thou. I met him in Miami with Jeff Touw. Jeff and Eva Touw. Jeff Touw. Jeff Touw is the oldest? No, Jeff is the second. I'm the second. From Eva. Was that your big guy, Heinz? Yeah. What about Heinistouw? Oh, Heinistouw? Is it Heinistouw? No, that's Touw. Oh, okay. Because I know (coughs) that Touw is Jeff's uncle. But I, I know Jeff couldn't have a baby- When you talked to him, he seemed interested. Yes. Did you remember anything growing up with brothers? No. Did you see- Ginka? Frauclau. Frauclau is another sister. Oh. Fraukefaus, yeah. I met her with another person, but he wasn't in the... He's still alive? I don't know. Probably just not anymore. Gunta Kruger? Kruger. Oh. Okay. He's gone on. He's old news. That's it. These are all the men in the rotary? Yeah. Are they all? Are they government? These are all the rotaries, yeah. Everything but can't copy. There was one with 600 in it. (laughs) Well, no. I'd like to talk to a few more minutes.... die in the field. The other 80% of casualties were from disease, starvation, and other causes. The British lost about 20,000 men during the Battle of Bunker Hill. The American losses were even higher than that. About 120,000 men died during all of American's losses during the Civil War. In total, more than two million people died during the American Civil War alone. Many of these deaths could have been prevented with better health care, better sanitation, and better hygiene. The United States was a superpower by the end of the Civil War. But its influence declined rapidly during the post-Civil War era. The United States was still the world's most powerful nation for much of the 20th century, but its influence declined rapidly during the post-Civil War era. This decline was due in part to the rise of communism and fascism in Eastern Europe, as well as nationalism and militarism that emerged in many countries. These nations saw the United States as a potential threat to their own security and often sought to limit or prevent American influence in their own countries. As a result, the United States became isolated from many of its former allies. This isolation only grew after World War II when the United States entered what is known as the Cold War. The Cold War was a period of tension between the superpowers, the United States and the Soviet Union. The Cold War led to the development of the nuclear weapon, which provided the United States with an advantage over its enemies. Nuclear weapons not only made the United States invulnerable to attack, but they also made it impossible for the enemy to retaliate. As a result, the Cold War led to the development of the nuclear weapon, which provided the United States with an advantage over its enemies. The United States was able to invest heavily in its military, which included developing and testing atomic bombs. The Soviets, on the other hand, did not have the same resources. This imbalance in power led to tensions that eventually led to war. And this led to tensions that eventually led to war. This imbalance in power led to tensions that eventually led to war. Tensions between the US and the USSR escalated rapidly during the 1960s and 1970s, with the Cuban Missile Crisis being one of the most significant events. The crisis began when the US launched a missile into Soviet territory. This missile landed some 2,000 miles from the US-Missile base. The Soviet Union responded by launching a satellite into orbit, which caused damage to the US missile. This incident led to tensions between the US and the USSR, which escalated into the Cuban Missile Crisis. The crisis was the first step towards what would become known as the Cold War. The Soviets then launched a series of missiles into Cuba, which caused a major crisis in the region. This crisis led to tensions between the US and the USSR, which escalated into the Cuban Missile Crisis. Cuba became a source of contention between the US and the USSR. The Soviets then launched a series of missiles into Cuba, which caused a major crisis in the region. This crisis led to tensions between the US and the USSR, which escalated into the Cuban Missile Crisis. The crisis was the first step towards what would become known as the Cold War.(Static noise)(white noise)