[HEBREW TRANSLATION] ... and then they came back (coughs) to the United States. And my mother and my dad, uh, found a home over here. It's fully apartment, uh, dwellings? Well, no, it's, uh, it's one apartment within a block. And, uh, no more than a half a dozen families, and not all of them speaking the same language, speaking English. So my mom could go around and speak with the family, you know, about what, what they like. And, uh, the rest of us were ourselves. We, uh, we just got married, we lived in two different, uh, separate pieces of apartment blocks. (laughs) So, did your, uh, offer live very- live very close to where, where you lived in the war or actually more- Well, our, uh, new neighborhood was kind of more adjacent to the, uh, Edison. Oh. And did you know any of the people who lived there yet? I did not. You didn't know anybody? No, I didn't. Were you worried that people would get you? Uh, no. Uh, I rather liked some of the officers I saw. Uh, they seemed to be nice people. (laughs) I met some of the guys down at the, uh, at the, uh, ball games every now and then. So, it's like, you had another problem, which was the Japanese Americans coming over. Oh! Okay. My grandmother Mary said when the attack happened, she couldn't believe it. She said she was very busy that morning at work. And many people were walking their dogs on this place. Wow. And, uh, after the first bomb went off, she turned to the dogs and one of the men said, "I heard something. Let's go check." (laughs) She took you to the first one. That was the real thing. My grandmother told me that story. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. (laughs) I don't think that lady is nice. (laughs) Yeah. By the last time I saw her, she just didn't give a shit. (laughs) She was a horrible person. (laughs) Yeah, she was really... Dad, do you think he was a good father or bad during the war? How do you think? He did his best, but if you remove, uh, the prejudice here, you know, probably things would've gone good. If not, then people, I guess, wouldn't have been able to get back together and, uh, you know, life would've been pretty hard for him, too. All right. That doesn't surprise me, really surprised me. Yeah. Probably has affected quite a lot of people, I imagine. Yeah. Uh, originally we weren't that big a block. Uh, the Lennoxes had this huge house, 'cause the Lennox always had tons of food. And, uh- Hitler owned it? Who? Hitler owned it? Oh, who? Who do you mean? Hugel. Hitler's brother. You must have heard of, um, his family are the, uh, the people that invented, uh, the war, the, uh, the weapons. Like, the bombs they made, the planes, the rockets. They also invented the atomic bomb, which was a big thing for a while. And, uh, (clears throat) his brother, my uncle, he was a six-foot-eleven, uh, ex-American military officer. He served during World War I. My mother was not in the war because she was only 17 years old. Oh, she was so young. She was only 17 years old. She was so young. But nevertheless, my mother and all cousins were, uh, introduced through friends of friends. There was another couple, the Rosenthal's, and other people from the German community came along. The Rosenthals? Yes. The Rosenthal's came over with their family, and then my family moved in '43 to, uh, into a bigger house. Actually, they offered us a place, but we didn't want to move. (laughs) Can you believe that? We, uh, we ended up living over there. Good. (laughs) Was your father in the army wearing a star? Mm-hmm. Oh, wow. I never, I'm sorry, I never wore one because the, uh, snow eat, snowed everything up. I see, I see. So I didn't have a chance to wear one. I wish I did. But, uh, no, the, the snow ate them away. (laughs) Uh, my grandfather, he, uh, he died of, uh, smallpox. Yeah. Smallpox too? Yeah. I don't remember much about my grandmother. I don't know, I sometimes wonder if she made marriages. Did they ask you? She's not asked you yet, you know. No. Only to speak of. And he died of pneumonia? Yes. He died of a disease called pneumo- What was it again? My grandfather's name? Yeah. Well, I can't remember exactly. No, it's too much pressure. You know your grandfathers and grandmothers and all these people. No, no, my grandfather, uh, his name was Frank Rosenthal. Frank Rosenthal. Yeah. Gotcha, gotcha, gotcha, gotcha. But I was born in New Orleans. It was Russian and Latin. Oh, okay. Okay. Have you found anything, uh, that you, out of your family that knows about it, they know? Yeah. They know, they know, it's, it's just how it happens. Once it happens to all of us, we run the family. My father was a school teacher. (laughs) What else can you do? (laughs) (laughs) I tell you that's just, you know, it's just how it is. (laughs) Is it dirty outta hell? Why did your mama convert? It was a difficult decision. It wasn't a difficult decision. After the, uh, after the, uh, after the attack on Pearl Harbor, nobody liked us anyway. My mother was a kind of an activist. She thought we were going to attack. I said, "You guys are busted. Why would you want to do that?" (laughs) Because I was very much against it. But, uh, why not? She's a woman. She says, "Fine, I'll go over there." Of course, they didn't know whether they could do it or not. She said something to the effect of, "We'll find out in a few months." Now, did you have defense systems as a child? Were you a leader? Not that I remember. Did you know anything else? No, I didn't know anything. I mean, I knew other people played games, but I didn't really know anything. Oh, so you didn't really make any friends or try to make friends? Well, you know, you don't understand. (laughs) I was just a hero to everybody. (laughs) You believe in heaven and hell and salvation? I was just a hero. (laughs) You want to play safe? I don't know. What about back when you were younger? Do you think that theology played a bigger role in your life, or is it just the philosophy you have now?... and we are very lucky that we have lots of students who come to the university. My, uh, former... my graduate students, they make a lot of visits to the high school, and they get to see it for themselves. And, uh, we, uh, we organize field trips for the undergraduate students to try and make them visit their area. Oh, I didn't know that. Yes. That's cool. Sure, why not? But I'm outside Africa. (laughs) How old were you when you went to Africa? I was 17 years old then. Wow. So, uh, there have been many field trips to Africa over the years, but this one was special. It was very, very special. Now, why do people especially go to Africa? Well, most of us like to travel. (car engine hums) That's just nature. You can't... you can't stay at home. If you want to see the world, you have to get out there and see what you can see. Right. And if you don't mind, we'll be right back. (laughs) Have you enjoyed your degree since you were done, or happy with work? Actually, I haven't really had a chance to think about it yet. I'd like to retire and relax for a bit, maybe even in a few more minutes. Is there anything you're doing now? Not really. Okay. I guess, uh, it shows you can have fun in your career too. What else? Maybe, uh, become a stockbroker. (laughs) A stockbroker? Yeah. You wanna do, you wanna do a research about the family? The third and fourth generation. Oh. They call it a family business. They call it a family business. Oh. Well, I, I wonder if they make quite so much money as they make in Britain. Uh, they make more money in Britain. But I don't know. I don't know how successful they are. I heard that, um, sometimes they don't want to give it up either, because they might lose all their inheritance. Oh. (laughs) They lose a lot of money. Hmm. Yeah, I guess they're making a good living, but only if they can make it. You know, sometimes they can make it so much that they don't want to give it up. They never want nothing to happen to the business. So, anyway, let's not talk about retirement. Let's talk about you guys. So, with you, uh, with the documents, you should be able to get that at a time when things are expensive. Mm-hmm. Um, things could, uh, keep up with, uh, letting you pay for everything on time. Mm-hmm. One time, uh, my father owned a, uh, he, uh, his name was, uh, Howard. He was a carpenter, and he made a lot of money. How did he make so much money? He made tons of money, but one time I forgot to bring a file to him. I said, "Mr. Howard, I can't remember to bring my files," he says, "No, don't bother." He said, "The filing cabinet is sitting in your office." I said- (laughs) Anyway, long story short, I... that's what I wanted to know. So, with you, uh, with the docs, yes, you should be able to get to hand that in time. Just leave your education in school, and they should have you covered from here. So, as long as you pay for everything on time. One time, uh, my father owned a, uh, he, uh, his name was, uh, Howard. He was a carpenter, and he made a lot of money, but one time I forgot to bring a file to him. I said, "Mr. Howard, I can't remember to bring my files," he says, "No, don't bother." He said, "The filing cabinet is sitting in your office." That's great. He said, "Don't bother." He said, "Your phone will do just fine." (laughs) Yeah. Uh, he survived on his phone for, you know, if you wanna, he's got it on his email. Everything's monitored. Oh, yeah. Yes. He looked at it on his phone for, you know, he was like, "Oh, wait a minute. I left the house." He looked at his phone. (laughs) So, he, he just watches the house? Watches the house every day. All day long. (laughs) All right. Yeah. When you were young, did you know that you were a good swimmer? Oh, yes. Yes. Did you practice in your car? Or in your bedroom? In my own room, I actually had my own little lap top, and I would practice in there. Yeah. In fact, my mother used to tell me, "If I hadn't told you, you wouldn't know how to swim." (laughs) So, did you, I mean, did you ever swim good? Oh, yes. I swam pretty well in school. Did you pay attention? Like, did you learn how to swim or did you just do it? I learned how to swim very good. Did your father have you certified when you were young? I had to, still have to do it. Yes, you were certified- It was normal, normal to swim in- Of course, you had to go to the gym. ... things for my mother. But- You had to go to the gym, you had to take a test or something? No, I don't know. I'm not really sure. (laughs) Did you have problems in the military because you weren't certified? No, because I was already too old for that. I wasn't having any babies. Babies. (laughs) Oh, no, no, no. I was too smart. Why? Because what we used to do- Oh. ... well, everyone knew I was going to be five feet. I'm over. (laughs) Yeah. (laughs) So, you had a, you had a, you're a liberal certification, correct? Uh, I was. I wasn't the healthiest of them, but I certainly wasn't the weakest. Yeah. But I was the only one. We were in the service. There were six of us. (laughs) Now, when you were young, uh, uh, West, West Virginia, that's where you finished, you finished Central High. Yep. And when your population of missions came up, was it something that, you know, kind of scared you? Did you talk about that or- Nope. Wasn't afraid of anything at all? Were you nervous? Well, it's true that there was a terrorist incident in West Virginia. I was 18 years old. (laughs) And, uh, every day, every one semester I had after school, um, 200 of them after the, after Christmas, after the holidays were gone. And one day, I went there, and I turned on our language professor of Japanese. Because he couldn't hear himself, he had some trouble with his hearing aids. Anyway, he had a radio and a recorder. A recorder, yes. He recorded what we did in class and whatever, um, lessons that we were going through at that moment in time. So, while I was waiting for the train to go up, I remembered that we had that recording. And I actually went and I played the other people's material that I had taken from them at that point. So, I remembered exactly. He goes, "Oh, this is good. This is good." And I became a counselor to him. Oh. While I had the radio, uh, lessons started, I, I remembered he was recording those sessions. So, usually I would go to the library and, uh, I would take the recordings and put them together into a cassette. And I called it the Heartland Voices.... and we asked him about the area. And of course, he knew it. And then they brought them up to the shore. And there was a wonderful view, and also they were enjoyed that. But coming out of there, he would like to be just behind someone. So if someone asked you, "Are you area?" I said, "I'm a Hunsler." (laughs) And they helped me, because they didn't know how to... They didn't know how to say that on the radio. But, uh, they knew about me. (laughs) Because everybody wanted to be a balloon pilot. Have you heard of Zippo? No. No, how- How about Zippo? (laughs) What, uh, did they call you Zippo at one time or another? Did you ever think about that? Was that an option for you, um, to make life more difficult? I don't know. I guess it's a good thing in a way, because I could still go to work every day. Yeah, yeah, yeah. You know, it's very funny because we were sitting here just now and she was saying, "What..." She said the same thing, you know? Why are you feeling- Oh, oh my, my, that's right, yes. Yes, I'm pretty sure I overheard that. Yes, that's right. Yes. (laughs) How about if somebody says, "Is this Ron Eilers's phone number for General Electric?" You'd know. Sure. If not, I'd have to think. Are you spending too much? Uh, I don't. Well, the more money I spend it, the more I realize that, you know, spending too much is a pleasure. Sure. Spending too much. The more I spend it, the less I save for it. So I don't mind spending too much. Of course, if I had some emergency fund set aside, then I wouldn't mind spending too much. No, but that doesn't mean I would spend it wisely. Would you spend it too much? No, no, no. Sure. I, I think they're wrong operating a, uh, an airplane company or an auto company straight out of the door. It takes... Yeah. It takes your education, and you realize Alaskans are people. Yes. And without a 38 or a 39, you couldn't make much of it at 31 or 32. That's right. You know, our rescue team, we had a, also a term, you know, the war time. Our rescue team was when, when my mother took her baby to the, to the hospital or other people's babies. And, uh, the driver, he had his, uh, his phone ringing. And so he, uh, he pulled over. And I remember looking at this old, you know, old Polish. And the idea was from Warsaw, it said "Warsaw", and he pulled over. But he didn't even see that the phone number was wrong. (laughs) He didn't see that it was only the back of the tire. He, uh... What was it? The maker make and type. He didn't know. (laughs) He didn't know. So, anyway, we went, I went to high school, then to college, then somewhere where, uh, where there was, uh, uh, uh, airports. We looked up. You know, you had to go- And I started with, in Vermont, from, from- With the RCs. Yeah, yeah. I went to, first Vermont. Vermont, and then I went to, uh- And then, uh, then you did what? You started as a private? As a radio operator? (laughs) Mm-hmm. (laughs) And that kind of was your first experience flying as a young man? Yes, I did some training with, uh, with the military. With the company? Yes. Uh, with young pilots and advanced pilots and whatnot. Did you get, uh, operated? Did you get to, uh, become an officer at some time as a, as yourself? I never got to. How did you get out? Well, I don't know if it was ever considered. You know, did you do combat in your time down there? No, I never made it out. Like, uh, well, that's where you want to go now in pilot training, right? Yeah. Because that's where you make your money is in combat. That's amazing. What made you stay there? Uh, some of it was the same as it is here, but at a higher altitude. (laughs) Oh. So they called that- They had this, uh, what did they call it? They flew a plane from New York up there. Air balloon. Air balloon? Yes. A retired air balloon? No, not the current one. The very first one. Oh, yeah. Because I was there. Yeah. Same, same, yeah. Yeah. The same air balloon? Yeah. And, uh, oh, boy. I was with this group of local people from, uh, New York. And they went to, uh, Alaska Air. Uh, and, uh, we flew over Southeastern California on a north-south flight, uh, just to, uh, make some observations. And right after we flew over, uh, the, uh, the United States was, uh, hit by, uh, by a bomb. It was a Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. And we were very close, within four or five hours from dropping over some of these buildings that you see in the movies now-a-days. So my first airplane flight was very special for me because it was the first time an oil came out of the sea and hit the land. That's amazing. You mean like a whale oil? Uh, I think so. No. (laughs) Did you do that? Huh? No. I didn't know that. Did you find out that detail?... and what month did you move back into? '21. So, '21. (static) When you were in Poland, did you see any combat? No. Were there any of your father's men, uh, do you know of any of them by name? No. The only one who served was my grandfather. You meant the whole family? The oldest two, they served in the army. The youngest one, I can't remember his name. (laughs) Oh, so the eldest son, he never had to- No, never fought. All right. And did you know about Becca? You must've heard her at times. Oh, yeah, sure. She was everybody's grandpa's favorite grandchild. Tell us about, uh... (static) Did you get discharged while you were there? Well, uh, no, um, we weren't supposed to die like others. Uh, we went across the, uh, the, uh, the Luce River, which is a, uh, small river that flows through Poland. And, uh, the idea is we had to go by boat East. But the Germans had their foot soldiers on the other side. So they said, "Hey." Said, "Why are you here?" Said, "I don't know." Said, "Just stay with me." There was another Greek boy, not much higher. And we're both standing out there. And then I tell him, I said, "You know what? You look like a grandpa from the old country, but you look like Woodie Woods in Pretty Woody." I said, "Pretty Woody looks like Woody Woods." So he looked at me. He said, "I don't know who that is." I said, "I don't know either." So he looked at my friend over here and said, "That's Woody Woods." Said, "Oh, no. That's not Woody Woods. That's my uncle, yeah?" (laughs) And he pointed and everybody was laughing. We all three, four of us kids, we all kind of laughed. (coughs) So, he was a half-Swede, huh? Yeah. And how was he able to... Is that the weapon that made him Swiss? I don't know. His name was Rudolph Bloom? Good. (laughs) That's a Rudolph story. Yes. No, uh, you know, just funny things they did, going over the top. Now how many people had these protestations when you were all there, and how many half-Swedes were there? (laughs) Well, some of them didn't even understand what protestation meant. No, at these protestations when you set off, how many half-Swedes showed up? Do you think that turned out- Oh, both. All half-Swedes. Yeah, but they don't normally live in Sweden, so... But, no, so how many showed up? Oh, maybe 100 at this time. Well, let's say it was a Friday night. Opened with a huge, you know, big band. So you got how many people right away? Only... Did you find it strange? Did you know everybody was a half-Swede when you went? No. Did you find it strange that also half the people were, were Polish? Of course it was strange. (laughs) Of course more like... What did you see at the report desk? Yeah. We were, uh, we were just enjoying our life in Idaho. (laughs) (coughs) Now, where do you know about the Jews who were killed at the Holocaust? Did you, did you ever find out anything about the Holocaust in school or whatever? Maybe I'll find out later, yes. But, um, I didn't go to high school for one year and didn't finish fourth grade, so I didn't really find out much in school. Oh. Did your grandfather stay with you guys? No, he was too busy with the other stuff, too. Too much going on. Your uncle? Your aunt? They weren't really involved with politics. They were just... they had kids, they wanted them to be brought up. Brought up. Yeah. One of them was a police officer, one was a... one was a marine. Was that Marine? Yeah. Uh, another one was a, uh, realtor. Real estate man. Yeah. So, he knew before the trains got back in? Yeah. Did you know what you could... You knew what would happen? I heard something, yeah. The train was supposed to come, but they got caught up by the, uh, by the fire in Iraq, Iraq I. And, uh, they were dying of heatstroke. And you didn't... So you didn't know really about the Holocaust until after the war? No. Why didn't you know? Because I didn't know. How did you keep in touch with, through family and friends? From my family, uh, well, my uncle, his, uh, his mother died when I was young. Uh, my, my dad, he divorced his wife. Uh, my poor buddy, uh, got his, uh, got lost on the way to Germany. He was a carpenter. He loved to fix things. He was the only one that could read and write. And, uh, I've got boys on my side, uh, who are also uneducated. I mean, they're not illiterate, but they're not very bright. Mm-hmm. And they told me, they're like, "Oy, you call the Russian, you tell them not to put that much gunpowder." Oh. He's right there, he can hear you. But they never did that in reality. They told me to call the Nazis 'cause I lived next to them. And this time, I called 'em, and I said, "All right, you guys are dead." (laughs) And I don't know what happened. I heard gunshots. I didn't see anything. I heard, uh, I thought I heard a plane go down or something like that. But then I thought maybe the plane was gone.... I don't know. So let's talk about it. Um, I know why you chose this song because I think that, uh, this song was probably written for a reason. Uh- Oh, yeah. ... so it could be understood. Uh-huh. Why do you remember the camp? I remember the camp? Yeah. Because we didn't have any friends at the camp, so all of us were together. (dog barks) And then they made us all stay together. But, uh, we made it okay. And did you know about the systematic extermination of Jews? Nothing ever said. Okay. So you knew nothing about any of that. Nothing was- No. You knew it was bad, but you knew much about it? We just didn't know what to do with it because we were trapped by the Nazis. We weren't there. We didn't even know what to do. Okay. They wouldn't release people when they set up these camps and sometimes killed. Why would you want to go? Wasn't that scary? (laughs) Because once you went over there, you'd be dead. (laughs) 'Cause everyone who showed up at the camp, and they all had babies- What babies? ... and what did you think? How could you have babies? You're a woman. I'm a woman. That's right. That's my plan. (laughs) So, um, we never had any children because my wife actually got sick before. She died before she gave birth to me. But we ended up with roses. In fact, if you like roses... Oh, yeah, yeah. Daffodils, yeah, daffodils. Yeah. But, uh, no. We didn't have any children because my, my wife got sick and died very suddenly. Very suddenly. It was very sudden. She developed a very potent, uh, form of cancer. And we, we were too busy trying not to let her know how sick she was, or she might not help herself. And in the end, she just got sick and died. Did she tell you anything about that? No, not really. Not really? Not really. Now, what helped you guys during the winter in the camp that time? 'Cause, 'cause, you, you... I, I should know that. You should think I should tell you that information. Of course, you keep it a little while. Well, I mean, uh, I mean, uh, I was scared. Now, were you getting scared then? (laughs) I was never scared. Now how was a guy- I th- I think I was protected from my mother. My mother was never scared. She was always crying happy when you were in there. Happy? What are you talking about? 'Cause your grandmother and grandfather were always there. Grandfather was always there. Right. I, I used to go over there to see my old people, but nobody was really staying with them. So my mother was a lot scarier because she kept saying, "Go down. Go down to the hospital. They're going to take you to Auschwitz." Oh, I went down today. One day, my father did go down. He was very comfortable. He thought he might look stupid there because they filmed his face when he went. But, uh, but I never go to the cotton land or to see that stuff. But my mother did, because her brother went there. And it helped him. Did you pray to God or anything like that? Nope. At, at the camp, people were regarded as SS guards or- No, as Muslims. Muslims? And you were building, uh, uh, runways, right? Who, me? Runway? Oh, yes. For, uh, for you to build a camp. Yes, yes. Yes. And I started building the camp, but they didn't allow me to finish it. They built better, faster, better camp, almost everybody. They just, uh, they just moved us into these new camps. Was there another OG camp? There was another one as well. Those were, those were after the Nazis won the war. Those were there for 15, 20 years. How many camps were there? There was one camp at Auschwitz I, I think we used to be at, uh, number five or six. We were always in the hot zone. The more we were at the Polish people, the harder it was for us. And the longer we stayed in those huts, I would not recommend. I wish I never thought about it, but, you know, life goes on. That's just the way it goes. Mm-hmm. That's all. Yeah. And, and, and were there any other OG guys fighting in there as well? Fighting to keep us alive? Yeah. Oh, yeah. There was one guy who survived the whole thing, and he's a police officer now. His name is Ed Hall. He's the only one that made it. The rest of us all died. How old were you? I don't know. Some of them said 13, some of them said 14, some of them said 15. But we didn't really age. We just got there. They were much older than us. Wow. Did you have friends stay night after night? No, most of them were killed. Only a few made it. Few? And do you know what they did? What? They built huts. They built them with sticks and soil. They called it Bunkers. Bunkers? That's right. That's what they were. They had doors on the inside, not like this. This is a dump. You know, you go in there, you stay there for three months. And they knew how to build huts. They just built huts. That's all. They didn't have toilets or anything. They didn't have no nothing. Just huts. Hey. Were they aware of you? So how much of the camp was one big group? No, we were scattered. Scattered? Okay. And, uh, we received, guys got away with things. What, what did you wear? We wore our army overalls. I mean, we weren't allowed home. When you got home? So, so your instructions when you got deportation notice, although it wasn't called that at the time, except that you bring clothes and toiletries and so on. Toilet paper. Toilet paper? Yeah. That's being in the camp for a few weeks that you start thinking, "Man, this is not just..." What else were you exposed to there? Were you scared all the time? No, we weren't really scared. You mean, it was comfortable. Now today, are you shocked-... we were sent there, and- (group chattering) Do you have a bad memory from the war- No, it wasn't bad. (laughs) ... that you'd like to share? Not really. (laughs) (laughs) Now, when you were in the, uh, camp, you said that, uh, before that you lost most of your men. Yeah. How did you adjust to this new job? Oh, I missed them. Most of the guys that I worked with were pretty good soldiers. Very well. But (laughs) but I got used to it pretty good. Very good. Yeah. You must've been very fortunate then. Yeah. Well, let's hope that happens for you again. Did you ever do that at Nimitz? No. Didn't you go to school here? The only thing what I did possibly in school is, uh, we wrote a piece over there and we received some of them and sent it around. But those planes (laughs) that occupied our area. I mean, we were so lucky over there because we didn't get any. In fact, the internet was so wide. (laughs) And then also them, as I, I would hear them saying, uh, they said, "Mr. DeSoto, how do you call that house?" I said to them, "It's called a tent, it's not easy to work." They said, "But, but you're German." I said, "Yes, I'm the president." He says, "Well, then how is that?" He said, "Oh, that's very well." He goes away. You never forgot them though, of course. No. (laughs) (laughs) Uh, during this time, did you ever find strange that you began the war as a soldier, and then you got brought up through ranks to go fight there, and you ended it as a forced labor worker? Well, I just wanted to be something, but, uh... Something what? No, no. Of course, now you know. Thank you. I guess I, I don't know. Now, you said the majority of your 300 men when you were serving, uh, with at the O2 camp, were all either blue or new age or Beter, uh, Wehrmacht veterans? They come in lots. Yeah. No, not all were Wehrmacht. Yeah, besides Hans Becher and, um, uh, you know, Hans Luthe and, uh, Rudie and Friedrich Blum. Oh, yeah, yeah. Alf- Alfred, and then Rudie was Rudie Eichmann. Yes. Yeah, he drinks up to Alfred sometimes. (laughs) (laughs) What? What a dandy time we had. (laughs) And do you know of any other, uh, men in the camp stand out that you remember? Well, from what I can remember, uh, they, they treated us pretty good. They didn't treat us too bad. No? Yeah. That's good. Oh, yeah. It's good to remember that. Do you like anything about Germany? I like France. When I was in war and I said... when they said at Nimitz, they say, "Hey, Mr. Franz, why not work here instead of working in France?" But the guys, the other guys, they were fantastic companies. And when your company arrived, it was like a big boat. And we, as we wanted to, we, uh, used to carry our stuff from the long board to a house. They built under the bed, one part of the line was tilted off. So everybody, when everybody was bored, we tilt the boat this way and we were having so much fun and we saw we couldn't hold anymore. So we let go and catch every board and every board as light as it was, it went on the board and flew over the ocean, landed on the other side. (laughs) Have you, have you ever tried that? No. After the war was over... (group chattering) You know, back in the day, uh, we would do cross country running with the, uh, with the paratroopers and the army. Did you do any of that growing up? (laughs) No. Why not? Because nothing good came of it. (laughs) Uh, so back then, did you ever go across, uh, with the paratroops together? You know, just the Germans and the Americans? Oh, yes. Of course. And also, after the army fell, uh, some of the paratroopers married Japanese. So you had the high school graduates who started off their careers as an army, but they didn't know how to swim. So they went to the, uh, some of the Russian paratroops and taught them how to swim. (laughs) (laughs) Now, did you have, uh, over there at Nimitz... I didn't have a lot of time with them because we were just getting ready for leave. And when we got released, I was still in the military service. Oh, okay. And then we got our orders to go home. And after the war, 10 days later, we got orders to go home. So we were all too used to have a nice life in America. We wanted to stay there, but then the paratroopers said, "No, you have to serve in the army." (laughs) (laughs) Oh, no. No, I didn't like it at all. I didn't like it at all. I said, "I don't want to do this." But after a while, you're not going nowhere or doing nothing 'cause when we get back, they said you must pay. (laughs) They told anybody who ended up in the military, "You gotta pay." (laughs) Yeah.... the military, you did? That's what we all did. Really? So amongst your comrades, you're talking about males and females? No, male and female com- Comrades we were all equal. It was a- So you were really that male. So, so you think you were quite rare being a half of your military. Yes. Were you ever awarded any decorations? No. No decorations? And when you were in the war, did you ever think about what, "What are we fighting for? What's going to be my future?" Especially after Poland and France with all the success, what type of future did you think you were going to have? Oh, I always knew the future possibly didn't look too good. When during that point in time? Oh, that's why I was a soldier because at that time we didn't know what else to do but fight for our freedom. That's what we were trained to do. We had to go to work and do our best. But, uh, things didn't turn out quite like we thought. We weren't as fortunate. So I, uh, thought about something else. Why should I worry about tomorrow if I won't have a career for myself? So then I thought, "Let me see, what can I do for my countrymen back home?" I'm not going to serve in the army because they never let a woman in. But maybe there's a more out, uh, interesting profession for me, which is selling people tickets. Maybe that sounds much better. Did you feel, uh, that you would be hurtful by joining the military? Not in the military, no. No, because I'm only doing something that I want to do. I'm waiting for the world to come over me all the time. (laughs) Now, when you left the military, did your comrades know about the reason why? Yes. How did they respond to this? Well, some said it was awful terrible, but I, I didn't care about that. Because I, that isn't what I looked at. Uh, in Poland and Russia, uh, there were a couple of 100,000 soldiers. Most of them were wounded and four dead from shrapnel. And how did they respond? They just said, "Damn it, he shouldn't have done that." So most of them handled the impact, the impact of it differently. So you felt relatively well in the military? Yes. Did you feel safe? Well, I guess, depending on where you were. (laughs) Depending on where you were. Um, did any of your... You must have heard of that word, no? No, I don't think so. Did you feel safe giving a note to Hitler? No, I didn't get the chance to give him anything. (laughs) I tried to write a letter to him afterwards, but, uh, he never got it. He wrote back, he wrote a letter back, but, uh, he never got it. They say he never read his letters. I don't know whether it was a good or a bad thing, but he never got them. What was his name, your friend? Pohl, Pohl, Eudocenus Pohl. Eudocenus Pohl? Right. And, uh, where did he serve? What military, uh, did he go into? He went into the army in Poland. Uh- So he was a happy- He was doing pretty well there. He was doing pretty well there, but he didn't like it there. He wanted to go back home. And so his father was Jewish? Yeah. Is that what happened? Yeah. Now, how long were you in the military for? Oh, same question, how many years? How many years? He was many later, he was a general. (laughs) He was later the master of the corps of the Berlin district group. Over. Mm-hmm. And, and giving his fear, uh, destroying, destroying the enemy was almost daily, uh, performed. Mm-hmm. After that, he was transferred to France. Where was he living? Berlin. Berlin? Did he make it up high in the ranks in the military? No. Uh, did he have any brothers in the military? No. I didn't know. I didn't know there was a Pohl in the military. He didn't know about, no. Guess we'd better come in here before... Okay, show your stuff. Can I see my son up please? Hello. Hello. So, yeah. I got other things. Hello. Mm-hmm. I have five sons, no daughters. And my father had four brothers. When these sons married, they all had sons again when they got married. When they married their mistakes, my father filled them sometimes in. So they always named children after... Um, some married girls, some married boys. Uh, one, um, yeah, one of my father's brother met a girl in Berlin who was a nurse. Another brother of my father met a doctor, and she was a nurse. My grandfather approached the man who was emigrating to America. He said, "You guys play around here." Because he wasn't Jewish. And, and then they went over to Argentina. Uh, actually, uh, Buenos Aires. That was the last trip that took place before the First World War. That made it out of the first one. The first one, they had no go-no-go's or anything like that at all. And then they started to settle very well, even with all their offsprings. See, they came over, they came over, they came over. Some of them came over here to visit. One of them, uh, birthed today's first housewife. So, another brother of my father, uh, studied medicine and, uh, in 1935 immigrated to what was then Argentina. He couldn't, uh, buy a ticket for very much. He also had a son. This son has a wife in Syria. And, uh, he became a painter and d-... because of the nuclear weapon? You know, how is that? So after army, he became a monk. Ah. Ooh, ooh, there's a bird just hit me in the eye here. Sorry about that. He now goes to a temple. He's now a monk. He now lives in (beats table) Hamburg, Germany. Was, and so he was, was he, was he married? No. Oh, no, no, I'm not married. Yes, he is living with his third wife. And- Yeah, but the third wife wasn't Jewish. Yeah, but they are... Okay, yeah. Yeah, what this? Oh, no. So his mother, his mother was a full Jew. Yeah. His, his mother was Jewish. I think he was, he was (speaks German). Oh, no, no, no. Because his second wife, his second wife. First wife was, um... No, I'm talking about this, this, this uncle. Yeah, but the- My uncle's wife. Yeah. Well, he had two wives. Or sometimes three. Sometimes four. Sometimes five. (laughs) Whatever I tell you. Yeah, but I think there was some father who asked him because he was not a Jew anymore. And he had a younger brother who was his father's son. And the brother doesn't even want to know anything about it. He got such a bad character from his grandfather. Because he converted? Because he converted. Yeah. In fact, and I think he still hasn't recovered because that story will never let go. It's really a tragedy. Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, but he still- But anyway, my uncle, his, his, his wife ran away and she went to Rome, you know. Oh. And then he immigrated to Palestine. And after many, many years, after the war, he married another woman whom he knew from university. I see. So it's a human tragedy. That's really how it is. But anyway- Did he have a brother in Pittsburgh also? Who? Uh, he was here. Uh, he's in Hamburg now. What? What? What? He's in Hamburg now. Who's that you call sometimes from Pittsburgh? I think that's his first wife. No, my first wife from Germany is the first wife. Oh, yeah. But (laughs) no, those are two uncles. Well, that's a third uncle. Then, and, and so this must be, uh, Stockton. Let me write this down. Uh, let me write this down. So the third uncle was a lawyer. He immigrated to France when I was very small. Of course, in the 80s, somehow or some way, he was nice to us, um, I think Delta liked him too. Anyway, he was then, uh, in a concentration camp, in a camp in France, and France got overrun, but survived. But he got to know another woman whom he married later. And he was later representative, one of the representatives of France in the Nuremberg Trials. So he spoke for France and speaking French is not good. So that was an uncle. Father number three. Father number four, uh, was, uh, I don't even know what he does. I think he was a salesman, but I never had any contact with him. He went to Prague and apparently someone lived there in Italy, and then died there. Then he died there. Anybody who knows Italian history will know that they live in Prague. And he was trying to find that out under Italy through a relative of Lydia's cousin's wife. (laughs) Now, when all your uncles were immigrating to different places, you know, France, Palestine, Argentina, didn't you start thinking, "Man, we need to go too"? What, what in Argentina? Yeah, why didn't you, why didn't you go to your uncle in Palestine or uncle in Argentina? Why didn't you decide you did too? Why didn't I? See, I was getting off on my father to come over. You see? I said if, I said to America, "Hey, maybe I can come over as a kid too." But they said, "You can come to Uruguay, and we get you the, the boat over here." And they put us in Egypt. We had no car when we started the journey. We made no friends or relatives in Uruguay either. So we had to get one car- That was because, I mean, the, the Germans really didn't think so, but as young boys said, "We are German." I know. So society, you're not what you eat, but nothing bad means to us. You know, it's the bad things. Yeah. Now, today, do you feel, do you feel Jewish? Not at all. Back then? No, not at all. What did your world view, what, what is it? Do you still feel Jewish? Well, of course. We've, um, originally with, um, Roman, um, I'm not, I'm not Jewish. Um, I should be Jewish. I should be Jewish. That was your father who tried to tell by the... No, he wasn't interested in it. Okay. Only if they'll let him. Because his other wife had gone over. But normally, yes, we were Jewish. Now, anybody call you Jewish back then? No. No. Even at the OT camp, the guards or- Oh, no. No, no. The room was too warm, I think. Now, do you feel affinity with Israel at all? No, nothing at all. Country, right? But I like country music. How about you go to church and they talk about being confused with, do you feel affinity, you know, oh those are my people? No. No? Do you? Yeah. Yeah? Mm-hmm. You know, so just, just out of affinity that, you know, they talk about Jesus going in and attacking the dogs and so on. (laughs) You know, those are my dramatic people. And also when you hear about the Wild Scotsman, you know, it reminds Scottish descent, you know, I feel an affinity. We felt very hot for a few years. Yeah.... it was the one that came out of NPR because, obviously, they had a go at me, had a go at me, had a go at me. Yeah. Anyway. You, you know, you never do that sort of thing. So, um, no, I couldn't do that. Mm-mm. I, I, I got disrespected, uh, recently. I got in reality, which is when everybody's piling up debt. They're all related to Taliban and to Mohammed. That's what makes the difference. Because they don't agree with us now. They're friends of India and I was amazed to have... (laughs) I, I, I lived in California. Don't ask me, it's a long story. (laughs) And I saw her doing an interview and they tried to say to me, "They're Taliban." She called them all the, uh, Afghanis. And, uh, now later on I went, everybody's afraid of 9/11. What? Yes. What? Yeah, I don't know about 9/11. There was, it wasn't so horrible. I guess everybody- Do you think it's getting worse than when you were growing up? I think so. You do? You think very sure? Right? Uh-huh. And, and if so, why? Well, I... Well, no, I mean, I think it's, I think it gets... because of TV and everything, it's worse and worse and worse. Okay. That we hear from all of the, uh, every, everybody. And once that comes in, everybody, um, thinks whatever to, to be- Mm-hmm. ... the truth or, or whatever. Falsehood of, falsehood of science. Or, or belief of Taliban. Right. All men are created equal. I don't see anything to do with color or anything. Uh, I've talked to people of different colors and whatnot, but I don't see anything strange or so. Of course, if they're criminals, that, that's a different story, but there are also white criminals who- (static)(white noise)