[HEBREW TRANSLATION] Manstein had said that? Yes, of course. Yes, very much so, actually. So, Rüdiger Manstein, the son who manages the estate, adopts what I feel are liberal tactics. He not only feels that he is his father's custodian of the evidence, but also sorts out what he gives to historians and academics and what he refuses to give. Peter Hoffmann told me that the historian in Toronto had sometimes given a talk and had given the citizenry a talk and had said, the Zulieger had said, please write down what you want to know. And then he was there and he had questions on the table, as he had, and read them out with Julia Manstein. And, says Hoffmann, I then asked him, out of context, that is not bearable for me. He went away and read to me. And then he told me, no, that we don't get to read them because they were all in the diary, that there were many burning stories. And then I asked why? He can deny that he has no answer to that. There are things in it that shouldn't be there. When I once visited another one, a federal archive in Freiburg and I like to talk to this archive, I didn't have to at the time, I wanted to get in touch because I had to accept my security. I wanted a boring confirmation under the help of federal archives need. So I traveled to Freiburg and tried to register beforehand. I didn't succeed, but I registered with the body in this house. They said my name is so-and-so and I would like to pay you a visit. Dr. Kehrich, the chief general physician, introduced me to Mr. Kehrich. He said, are you the Stade who was at Danker Mannstein? I said, yes, that's me. The one with you, he said. I'm going upstairs to see you now. What was supposed to be a quarter of an hour's visit turned into, I think, four or five hours of instruction. The first question Dr. Kehrich asked me was, "Can you help us get Mr. Karl-Stein's private diary? With good, correct, with reading, with two young employees. I said: "That's not even possible if you drag the investigator and the Mahlstein and the Urkahl and the field marshal completely different opinions. He does everything he can to keep things from becoming public, to help in the service every day. But think the assembly tagge book. Yes, I always knew he kept a diary. But this one, I have to say here, I want to say in my leadership that it would have been a normal book, but had lying in front of him. I sometimes saw that he wrote, but he always wrote by hand. And I didn't do more than promise to bring it in. And he didn't tell me that he had finished. Then he should, as they say, that's a good legal person, but something that I think should be heard on occasion. He didn't actually do anything more about me. And that's how it was... Although the whole time I was There was traffic participation. You must think that we're on a classified... That's one of the commanders-in-chief of the army group. The highest secrecy escort applies to them. In other words, the intelligence officer is the boss says you have to pay like this. So they don't take on a non-commissioned officer, there's no secretary or anything like that. It has to be made public. I suspected it, the secret file, and Mannstein is responsible for it. I didn't know that he was responsible for it. Then he wanted to find it all good. He wanted some of the documents that he no longer wanted. They no longer avoided it. Of course. If somehow the others are in charge, the crime. You can't do it, but you can preside over it. If you are bound by law to stop the crime. Why didn't Mannstein try to prevent the Holocaust? Excuse me? Why didn't Mannstein try to prevent the Holocaust? He has great respect for my great field march, has a heart ruper. Yes, I have to apologize for that answer. He couldn't do anything. Did he talk about it? You know what he told me, once in the 17th twenty years. He has something true, called such a sense of Do you know other people who were Horst that in the Wehrmacht? Do I know anyone here? Like the Horst, your childhood friend, that was a Judah, that was also from your Wehrmacht do you know others like him? Horst. Horst. Yes. Open. Offenfeld. Open. Horst. Yes. I'll show you the Horst. Yes. Do I know any more? Know others. They said when we had dinner. You met the personnel officer from Kanaris. That was Helmuth Maurer. And he said that the Abwehr had the documents about Heidrick, he was one of the main pictures. Yes. They got the official ones with them. That's who? This Meier. With open eyes, apparently I have not heard about it. So it's Maurer. Maurer. That's Maurer for you. And Helmut Maurer. He has a memory, he's no longer alive either, but he has... That's the man who comes to the Kalaris. The pioneer who was bugged in the movie. If Kalaris was desperate about the progress of things, then you now order little Helmuth Maurer and he has to follow up the piptodesis. That's Helmuth Bauer. And he said that Heidrich was the main citizen? Maurer first explained to me that he had only been sent to Prague in prayer by Canaris. I think he was wondering what he was doing. He was sent to Czechoslovakia to hand over the information. And even read something about it. Here you are. Thank you. There you go. Thank you very much, Mr. Program Citizen. Rudi Meier. Well, that would be a letter. I can hand it to you. From Meyer? Yes. I know. Now I have to have a look. This letter from me to our chief editor. Okay. I have two copies for him. I gave him one of them. He said he would like to have it read. He said he would like to be read. He said he would like to be read. Can you read this, please? Here about a text. Let's have a look at the Cvs. August already. Let's take a look at this. Yes, please. I can read this to you. Can you give this to me? Can you copy this and give it to me? Yes, we can. Have you taken a copy with you? No problem. We have a copy inside. Did you know back then that Milch-. I wanted to say long again. Ah, I'm sorry. No problem. No problem. Now it can't. Did you know at the time that Mirch was a so-called Hauptjuden? Luftwaffe, in the Luftwaffe. That's the first time I've heard that. Yes, you did. Had you heard that then? After the war. After the war? When you had Manstein. When you had Manstein, he knew. What did you? What did... I probably can't. You know when Manstein was born. And what did Manstein think about the fact that we had a so-called Habjudenbahn, the Luftwaffe? Of course, of course. Very well. Do you know other people who were so-called half-breeds or Jews who were in the Wehrmacht? Alexander, did you have problems when you were a soldier and so on because you had a great-grandfather who was a Jew? But there was one thing that I never want to forget. That was two years after November 1942, when Fresco's Penning was deployed on the land that was available here. And in the summer of the following year, in the summer of '63, I had a conflict with a trouble with Manstein. I reported to him an information that the then colonel and general staff Fink, I had told me before. Fink told you he wanted to see me. It was an urgent matter. I would like to... When can I see you? Fink says: It was in Vinnitsa. In the town of Vinnitsa, he had the quartermaster department. He was a fifth car that went out with the Kilier. There was the Minister of Transportation of the Herrenburg, something like that. And for supplies and for so many services, for example, the Stalingrad included "Army in charge, that was the central man. When Fink called me, I knew it was an important call. He called me on the phone and I had to speak to you immediately. He went in to the field marshal and said: "Field marshal, tonight it's Colonel Fink who wants to speak to you. I just wanted to ask him to take leave for a few hours in the afternoon. I knew they were standing. I would have gone to the chilundi after lunch. If I didn't know it like that. Yes, of course I did. So I was at Fink's after lunch and I thought, now I want to tell you this. It's a really bad thing. I had a visit this morning from two junior general staff officers who contacted me on their way here from home to set up their new post from here. Somewhere in the Helscher area. By chance they became witnesses, eyewitnesses, to a terrible story, namely: they had to wait for an airplane that they were supposed to take with them and they heard shuffling in the area and said: "What's going on there? In the area around the airfield. They went there and saw how flowers were being killed and the masses were being deployed. They thought: "It must be, it belongs here, this district is part of the catchment area at the rear of Army Group Manstein. We have to make a stop in the Elza now and talk to our superior, Colonel Zink, Colonel General Stabschink. You must pass that on. You've said everything to Manstein now? Well, now yes, of course I've told you that. Only I came back after lunch and thought: now it's going to be a really hot conversation with Manstein. What did I already know about him? I said: I'm going to touch on a very important point: How do I do this most skillfully? We had a certain time after midday, I don't know if it was three or half past three, that was tea time for me. Then he came and then I was trusted to sleep here and I had a chess set up. He loved afternoon tea with me playing a few things chess. That was an arrangement and a bit distracting too. All short and sweet. I set up the chessboard, we sat down between us and so he came and sat down, took his first cup of tea and said: "What did Fink want before you? And then I thought: "That was really important. He had a visit this morning from two young secretaries general who assumed that was the case. The Trifft, the basic army area of the army group. Why doesn't he come from the army area himself? My father told me: "Mr. Vetter, Colonel Field has to call me specifically at the Rieschen, call him and say he'll be there in a quarter of an hour. Then he'll make his report. But he thought it would be more clever or an act of fairness if this explosive report was first brought to him via the small official channels, as we used to call it, via the Assudanzen or Ordnanzaufzir, to give him the opportunity not to have to take a position immediately, but to think about the dimensions of this information. So, sure. I say: "Mr. Röckmascher, I'll be on the phone for an hour and a half. But then it will be an announcement. Then I was informed that there is a difference between reporting something and reporting something. That is a very precise and important difference. I was still only telling them what I had experienced, what I could do in the upper circle. So I don't need to risk the stone. I was in favor of arbitrage. Colloquial language. There, there. That's all there is to it. That's the biggest elevator you have. We also had a movie theater ramen where we went. We had the biggest elevator of 100,000. They went into this tea and saw an SS crew there, an extensive SS crew. They asked: "What are you doing here? "Yes, can't you see what we're doing? We were dug out and then we became one with the war foot, with the rail in here. And then came the next situation and so on. Comrade. "One hundred thousand..." That's what he said. "You can't keep a hundred thousand German corpses here." "No, but we did that ourselves at depths in '48. We can't do that. It makes a mental, side (...) You know, we had such a nice chat (clearing throat) about the opening of the Olympic Stadium in 1936. That's the ceremonial act, the Olympic Stadium in Berlin. And we all know from the reports about it that hundreds of thousands of people entered the stadium, the Berlin Olympic Stadium '39. Let them stay. Now imagine this crowd of one hundred thousand people. They can't just make themselves disappear, the corpses. That would be impossible. You can see from that that it's a really nasty plot to get them to show up and impose your friend Fink. And was Fink just overly evil on Google. My friend was an ordinary citizen. I knew the gentlemen. And became friends. Yes, a hundred thousand. We have, we have never said that, the Secretary of State. So, I can tell you. That is, that is propaganda. And then he slipped off and deflected and said: "You know, I was Secretary General during the First World War. And I know about the development of modern propaganda. That is, that is sprinkled in on all possible channels. That's what Fink (...) Fink and these boys should be told first. It's that simple, you have to see through it. That can't be right. That's not even possible. I don't want to go into it here. The report of a general officer is a first-class report of the rank of a report on preparations. If we lose confidence in the general officers, then we can pack up, for example. That is unthinkable. Such an explosive report cannot be doubted. The people who delivered it are qualified officers. You can't make up fairy tales. Like victory and victory slayed. I had an anger about the reactions of my time. And there (...) now is the time for me to say why I am so personally struck by this information. I had a great-grandfather who was born Jewish and who converted to Christianity in his later years. So I'm one-eighth Jewish, only one-eighth, but still a great-grandfather. My grandfather said: "You've never told me that before" "Why should I tell you that? Why should I tell you that? It can be told differently. But now it's the new year. We'll wait to tell it. We only have six years. The rehearsal is collecting. St. Paul's Church, 848th important man. I have relatives in England, relatives in America. They don't belong to witchcraft. And I'm one-eighth witcher. That's interesting. That was very interesting. Especially after a while, when we had already moved chess pieces a few times, I was only happy when he won. I never wanted to win. He also beat me better than I did. I wanted to say 90% of all papers have been beaten at least 1000 times. So he took at least 90% of what he won for real. But if he gets nervous, then of course it could happen that I shake him. Then he's in too bad a mood. And well, at the very end he says something terrible. He says: "If what he said is true, then (...) I thought that was the worst thing. I thought that was really bad. I screamed then. And then after, uh, this, uh, because he said: "My great-grandfather was a Röhminger in this same situation." Not in that context. But yes, yes, it may even be connected in that context. That I also, yes, I say, "Yes, yes, so, now, where did the chronology come from?" Yes, exactly. But you can read about it in my book. It had happened before, at a certain time before. At a very late hour, we had. We had put ourselves on the market together, with passion, and we had a pulse of zero. "Oh, captain, the one who stands too much, he's lost, the one who stands too little, he's won. That's just fun, that's a sign of what he does. It's not sport at all. Would you like a sip of tea? Yes, with pleasure. Here you go. A few years ago, I was told about Lexor, who was only interested in such things historically. He read a thick book in the first month's reading list. It was a biography of Schickesgraben. Manstein read that? Manstein read it. Who is Schickesgraben? Greatest interest. That was also a generous part. So a world champion could calculate what across the continents, from the intellectual, on the other continents. That was a generous part. I only know the story of Schickesgraben when it was sent out and then no longer at school. We know it from the two of them. Do you think Manstein was of Jewish descent? Did he say that you were at Weimbitze three years too late? That's true in the election, of course, we sometimes drank a glass of wine more. He said, I'm not a manchild, I'm a favorite child. And where does your favorite child come from? He himself said: Where do favorite children come from? I don't know, I know. Sometimes we say it was even an ancestor, a superior like in Warsaw. We heard that there. But the place that you leave to a field marshal Hitler. Whether that was a joke, whether that was a coquetry, this intellectual attempt at reeducation that was there. But I don't know that, Mr. Köllner. But you were with Manstein. He loved to bluff. But you were with Manstein for three years. How sure are you that he meant that? You know him now. It was a piece of truth. I do believe it. I'm not a genealogist. I'm not a racial researcher. I don't know. But he said: "Belinski's attitude in Warsaw was completely unexpected. That's what he said? "That was an upper stage in Warsaw. That went on the pinto. What was your reaction? My reaction was: "Silence. What should you write? Did you ask any more questions? No, no, no. What should I do? What should I do? What can't I let him do? He was also... He wasn't a drinker. He always got up. He couldn't do it. When there was peace at the front, he could be very cheerful, very entertaining, very funny. He gave a lot of things. And back to your sister. She actually had a problem with the Nazis before the Nazi era. Can you tell us about that? Yes, please do. That would be a bit what I mean. I'll come back. Oh, yes. Here you go. Can you tell me about that? Because she has a bit of a problem because she also has a great-grandfather who was a judo. So my sister, my older sister, two years older, Ruth Robert. Ruth had grandmother Kleist, Robert then the first, great-grandfather Robert Phyllis Prutscher. He became the Prussian Minister of Culture without having done his A-levels. What's that? That's interesting. He was a great man, he was at the top of the class. A great man. And he wasn't Minister of Education for long. He'd been a senior president for longer. He was an active officer in a cuirassier regiment, one of the most praised regiments, I think. He was a very high cuirassier regiment. He took his leave because he no longer had a profession, a life profession. He laid with diligence. I think he had a whole year's leave, educational leave to France. He came back from France as a young man and had five ideas about becoming a policeman. And he succeeded. He had a report to make to the emperor, the first time he reported, he was first the president of the government in Sweden, a minor incident, who became president of the government. And then one day, when he resisted, he became chief president in the province of Posen. Posen was a Prussian presence. And as such he had to report to the Emperor and he said his name, Thedes Brutscher, Count Thedes Brutscher. The Emperor told him: "Krafthedes Brutscher, who you said was related to Illy Gratzscher. Wasn't involved in the change, but was highly intelligent. There is a connection to be advised to Illy. That was the Polish princess whom the emperor married when he was crooked, and who could be used as the wife of the King of Poland. And at this news, the emperor suddenly had a tear in his eye. When he was cheaper by the Liberazie, which will be their best friends about us now, where they were. And if you went from Poznan to Berlin or vice versa, then the Polish family was very strong and interested in the West. In other words, they had properties in Poland, they had properties in the Free State. But Hohenschönau was on the way to Berlin, so to speak. And that is not a separate matter. And I believe that both of them, yes, the father, went to school in Freienwald, so they were still known and not in Verriegelwarten in Freudenwalde. So if you want to read up on it, you have to read a bit, you have to read a bit of history afterward, according to the book "Ob der Ullstein nach Freudenwalde" ("Whether the Ullstein to Freudenwalde") to Freudenwalde. They wrote history there. And Elise Ratschügel died in the arms of her friend Bernadotte. She freed herself to death. The old emperor knew that from his youth when he was terribly dead. The last story is with her sister? No, that's a bit before the origin. I always talk about the elemental force. But that at some point... Yes, that's always been the case. It's always been like that. You can be a bit like me. Yes, if you get something like that into your brain, then... Then you have to see that you can really summarize it in a controlled way. The fact is that my forefather, Zähleprätscher, had very close and trusting contact with the royal house and was promoted. And so the former cuirassier uniform, cuirassier officer, who then also had himself transferred to the most praised, finest regiment that the people had to offer, namely the Garde du Corps. The Garde du Corps was the informer regiment of the comrades of the Friendly Chamberlain. They had the helmet on the eagle, on the helmet of a large Friendly Eagle. A terrible uniform, this golden eagle on the helmet. That was around all the time. Within a very short period of time, this young toothsome man was so out of the ordinary, so intelligent, that he was already a regimental adjutant as a young lieutenant. So he had an extraordinary career ahead of him. He then took his leave because the profession itself did not reassure him. He would certainly have become a general, but that didn't reassure him. But that wasn't a career for him. Then he became insurance president in the insurance company, also at the railroad stations, then he became chief president in Poznan, then he was chief president in Hesse and finally he was chief president in Silesia. In between, he had already spent a year or two or three years as under-president there. So let's say he had another career. When he took his leave as Minister of Education and Cultural Affairs, because he was thinking through a law, a parliament, there was a law in its half as the elementary school law. He had taken over the draft of the primary school law from his predecessor as Minister of Education and had read the draft law. The Protestant churches wanted to build in privileges in the elementary school system. That was a Spietist idea, as you can see behind it... He wanted to enshrine it in the law that the nursing staff should run a town here. That they had the right to staff the elementary schools down to the elementary schools, i.e. teaching events. He failed in this and took up his usual good work. That's when they sent him off. And his last position was Chief President of Silesia and was therefore immensely popular. And he had his jubilee, lasted far beyond his pension money, the chief president, and then had a quiet, peaceful day at the hut on his 80th birthday. The University of Wroclaw held a torchlight procession for him. Students and professors passed by his house with torches. How can you explain that? From this relationship between Count Zähne and later the successor and the king, Emperor Wilhelm I. And then after the intermedium of the emperor, the Hundred Days Emperor, as it was said, wasn't it, who took over the crown as a terminally ill man, he then became Konzelantis and also to the subsequent young emperor, Emperor Wilhelm II, in the good and friendly contact to have. This friendship was strengthened by the fact that his wife, née Von Rohr, had a great friendship with Empress Auguste Victoria, and when he died at his great-grandfather's house near Charlottenburg, in Bismarckstrasse sixty-seven, he was the first tenant in the new building on the mezzanine floor, as it used to be called. He was the Schnappi of the building, the one who got ahead, and he also sold something to God's shop in Bismarckstraße. And he died there and my great-grandmother, Franz Wittrich, stayed in Berlin because there was only one reason she didn't want to live there, because her friend, Empress Auguste Victoria, visited her for tea from time to time. They liked each other and I remember how they lived together. Excuse me. Can you, excuse me. Can you tell these stories with your sister...? With your sister? Yes. Only this is here, so this is the atmosphere we grew up in. So now I have an older sister. And this older sister was called Roberta, named after their grandfather Ruth and great-grandfather Robert. Robertha was always a very headstrong and independent young girl, but with a bit of a bounce in her step, if you like... Then one day, I was probably under ten, I came home from lunch and my sister, who was studying theology at the University on Unter den Linden, was sitting opposite me and I thought I couldn't see straight, she had a badge on her blouse, a Nazi party badge. I say: "What do you have on your blouse?" "Yes," she says, "a party badge." "Yes, how did you get that?" "Well," she says, "Baldur gave it to me personally." "Who is Baldur then?" "Baldur? Don't you know Baldur von Schirach?" "That's Baldur von Schirach, that's your badge. He gave it to me as a mark of honor. Told me the formalities would be made up for. You're with us for now. And he has me, he wants to appoint me, he wants to propose to Dr. Goebbels, the head of Berlin, that I be appointed Reich leader of the National Socialist students in Germany. The appointment will be made in front of Mrs. Goebbels. And then, one of the next days, I will go with her to Helemannstraße, where the construction management is located, in a building that Mr. Schmidt would know is still there. Up there on the fourth floor is the NSDAP party headquarters. So that must have been around 1939. Roughly. So I said: "But you can't become a party leader." "Why not?" "Because great-grandfather Heck writes here in any case." "That's not possible. You have a great-grandfather who was born Jewish." "That's not possible." "He wasn't Jewish at all, he became a Christian, he converted to Christianity." "Yes, but when?" "Yes, we'll find out." "I'm going to Hamburg," he was a Hamburgert, and the city of Hamburg appointed him as a business delegate to the Paulskirche eighteen hundred and forty-eight, spelling, head of the delegation of two thousand and a half army to the Paulskirche. So, if he consciously in the church books you have to be able to clarify that. There were no registry offices back then. You have to search the church books. I will go to Hamburg for a few days and search until I have solved this puzzle, until I have established whether he was a Jew first, baptized as a Christian right away or whether he was baptized a Christian later. That's not important for you. Good. Good. Don't you think you need to hear all this? My sister went to Hamburg, came back from Hamburg after three or four days, with no results. All that time because she said, my favorite friend Steinberg, the church books were all burned in the Hamburg fire. When did that take place? I think eighteen forty-one. So without result. Yes, good. But I must still be with von Verherrn. Do you think he has a relationship with Shira? Yes, with Shira. Of course. Well, then she stayed behind a few days later and sat with Baldur von Schira at Göbbels. Yes, and Göbbels would have listened to all that and, surprisingly, would have known exactly who Moritz Heckner was at the time. Göbbels was not uneducated, he came from a Jewish school. He wasn't stupid either. My sister then explained to him how things turned out in the family, with the lineage and all that. She probably put a big question mark next to Hexer. I don't know. Maybe he did. He, Göbbels, listened to all that and then said: "Well, as far as I'm concerned, we're very welcome." Then I told him, my sister said, "Dad, you don't know that I can't get my way in front of him. And if it was the case that I was already listed as a member with you, then I would explain my brother to you. And then he said: "As you wish, Father." That was the end of the Baldur von Schira affair before it had even begun. And where is your daughter, ah, your sister? And where is-- Yes, and that's our division, where is my sister? What are you saying now, sir? There are things you don't have to talk about too soon. I have a question. Back to the person. You're turning yes, I've told you something. You have the name Rüpke, because you're probably a Rützel. That means Rütze. It's a bit of a standing name and then he's afraid of the name Rübke. The name Stahlwerk means nothing but seventy. Or something like that to the side. Now Dorstolff has clouds. A memorial for a building like that. That's very serious. And she's a clever and thoughtful woman. What did she do? Not that I'm talking again. What did she throw? That she became a woman 14 years ago. The man had the house in Mittelschreiberhaue in Munich and runs the business as mayor. Did you go back to Manstein? Were you there? Did you know that Manstein on November 20, 1941, when he was with the Eleventh Army? He said that Judaism forms the intermediary between the enemy in the rear and the still fighting remnants of the Wehrmacht and the red leadership bearer of a national idea and therefore had to understand the need to bring the hard son to Judaism, the spiritual bearer of the Bolshevik terror. Did you know that? Not at the time. When dying calls. Mr. Manstein, you must. Imagine that I am. How did I get to Manstein? Everyone in the high command of the.