[HEBREW TRANSLATION] ... and we got some phone numbers. We found a baker under there. Oh, really? I, I was skeptical, but anyhow, I sent off my signal. And they said, uh, "You've got to go to the local baker in Evanston. Make somebody, uh, here are so many more people here and, uh, uh, he needs some help." Oh. So I was transferred to that baker, and to the care of that baker. And I had a bed and I, I had something to sleep, uh, at night. And like I said, uh, there was about, uh, a young girl almost our age, little bit younger. Uh-huh. And that was the first time later on, three years ago, talked to her on the telephone. Oh. Because then she told me, another friend of mine who lives in Germany was there too. And saw her there at the time when she was... And she had taken over the bake shop. Uh-huh. But she later on sold that bake shop and moved away because she married and had two kids show up. Huh. Now, uh, you didn't know about the systematic extermination of Jews- No. ... until after the war, right? No, I, I didn't, I didn't know about. I mean, uh, we had a hard time. I mean, we were liberated on, in April, in April '45. By who? By, by the American army. And, and I saw them, you know, I always was in transit between baking and bringing things into the store and... Oh, there was another funny thing. Uh, one or two days, because the army often or persons came so fast, they dissolved that, uh, concentration camp and other camps. And suddenly, uh, there came hundreds and hundreds, I don't, I, I, I don't, I really don't know how many. I, I, I would say hundreds and hundreds. I don't know if it was up to thousands, but, uh, concentration people, undercover with dogs and, and, and soldiers. And, and, and these were marching up the, the main highway that was in front of the bake shop there. Really? This was- So they had- What town was this? It was Hiltersleben. So this was at the ed- you were still part of the Dierks camp, but you were baking in Heltersleben? Yeah. Heltersleben area. I think the province is Anhalt. Oh, okay. In the, in the, in the province of Anhalt. Heltersleben. Okay. First one was Kerf. Uh-huh. And the second one was Heltersleben. Anyhow, soldiers came in, and, um, asked in a, in a certain way that he needed all that he could give him. And, and, and he at that particular time, he probably gave him, uh, 20, 25, uh, loaves of bread and they took him outside, uh, and, uh, he had something to eat, but the prisoners laid on or whatever. They, they took a rest or whatever. Now, the, but these men, all these prisoners, were they under German or American guard? They were under... That was before the Americans came. So they were under SS guard? Yeah. Suddenly there was no, uh, concentration camp anymore. There were no guards. There was nothing. Now, were these people Jewish? Uh, I don't know. I, I, I didn't get a chance to talk to anybody, because, uh, only, uh, soldiers came into the shop and asked for the bread. Were they SS? They were all SS there. Were you scared? No, I wasn't scared because I was in, in, in my white uniform and I looked like a normal baker- (laughs) ... selling bread, you know? Yeah. So, uh- So what did you know about- They had beaten the other guys there. They're living, uh, close to that store. And... Did you lose many relatives in the Holocaust? Yeah. All on my mother's side. How many? Do you know? Okay. Uh, I'll tell you and you count. Okay. Uh, from, from everything I know. Um, father and mother. Of your mother? I mean, on my mother's side. Yeah, so your grandparents? Father and mother. Where did they, where did your grandparents die? I don't know. They were gone one day. You, you never found out where, what happened to them? No, we never found out. Okay. And, um- And their names? Uh, Moshe. My mother's, uh, maiden name is Moshe. What was her first name? (laughs) There was no, uh, denying, uh, that that was a Jewish name at that, for the Jewish people. (laughs) I have the name of Moshe. Yeah. Um, and what was your mother's first name? That can always keep me waiting for when I was asked, uh, uh, if I was alien or not alien, you know? Uh-huh. (laughs) So- Yeah, what was your mother's first name? Oh, her first name was Gitl. Gitl? Yeah. How do you spell that? O- okay. There, there, there is one thing. When, uh, my mother married my father, or, or no. When her father, uh, gave the information for her son. Uh-huh. He said Gitl. Uh-huh. And, uh, the, the secretary who was writing it down, he wrote Hitler.... spell? Which is as, as Jewish as could be but I don't... He wasn't wrong, you know? Uh-huh. So how's it spelled then? I have a paper that my father later on, when, when, uh, the Jew... a woman, she had had the name, uh, Farah, I think. Uh-huh. They said that... They called her by name Farah. Uh-huh. Also that they used. Uh, he wrote that, uh, she already had a Jewish name, uh, Gertl. Which is like Gittel. Uh-huh. And he kind of raised it. Really? Yeah. Now how do you spell Gertl? He always, uh... He always, uh, would tell 'em, uh, that he is a former, uh, military man and, uh, worked for the German government even though they, they put him early on pension because his wife was Jewish. But later on when the war started, they put them back up to a certain time 'til he left Berlin. Oh. So he was, he was, uh, involved too. Uh-huh. He had a Jewish wife. Now what were the first names of your grandparents? Uh, my grandfather on his side was Raphael. Uh-huh. And, uh, my grandmother's first name... Ah. Anyhow, she was a born Arndt. Uh-huh. I know she was a born Arndt, but you always, you never call your grandmother by her first name. Yeah. So I have it on paper but, but, uh, I don't have it in my mind. And how do you spell your mother's first name? Uh, o- offically? Or, or, or, I mean, uh, Gittel? Yeah. How would y- how do you spell that? G-E-T-T-E-L. Oh, Gittel. (laughs) okay. Gittel. Yeah. And, so, your, you lost your- Oh, sorry. Gittel. Uh-huh. With an I instead of G-E-T. Yeah. Now, so you lost both your grandparents in the Holocaust. Who else did you lose? Uh, the brother and his wife and his two sons and- What were their names? ... daughter. His daughter was able with her boyfriend of here in States- Uh-huh. ... to leave for South Africa. Uh-huh. How that happened, I just don't know because I wasn't, I wasn't there. I was some place. I didn't know about. My parents were already... I was by myself in Berlin. Uh, I don't know when it happened that, uh, uh, that she was able to leave for South Africa. Uh-huh. So, all I know is that she got to, uh, South, uh, Africa. I think Johannesburg and that she lived there and, and, and she married that, that young man she, she went with. Cool. And, uh, I didn't, I didn't get in touch with her after the war because nobody knew really where she was. And, uh, let me put it this way. I had enough to do to, uh, to get on my own feet. Yeah. And find, find my girlfriend and get married and, and, and get a job and make some money to, to pay the rent. You know? And, and, and things like that. Mm-hmm. So... Then I didn't have my parents at that time. Mm-hmm. Because they had to move away from the Russians that came closer and closer to Slovenia or Slovenia or whatever they call it. Uh-huh. Basically in England. Uh, and we moved, we moved, uh, walking and, and traveling and, and in different camps to my sister. Uh-huh. So- Yeah. I had a sister five years older and I had a brother two and a half years younger with, with Hans and then I was the youngest. So we moved to my sister who had married. And that was a funny thing. There, there was a rumor too that the next Nürnberg law would forbid that a non-Aryan is marrying an Aryan. Yep. So she had a boyfriend, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, somebody she loved him. She, they wanted to marry any how. Uh-huh. Um, that they got married in a hurry and, uh, he was a Aryan by the name of Robert and they moved on to, uh, to where he, uh, was living and working. When did they get married? Nobody... And since she has the beautiful name of Lotte. Uh-huh. Greta, Greta Lotte. Uh-huh. Greta, Margareta Lotte. Uh-huh. That nobody even suspected or that she had any occasion to write into any paper that she was not Aryan. So when did they get married? They got married in, in, uh, where he lived in Berlin. What year? What year? I was working as a baker already. And I think that must've been, uh, in-... who's house. Did he serve in the military later? No, but, uh, he was an engineer and he, uh, later on was in charge of, of an electricity, uh, installation for whole province of so-and-so, uh, in, in, in Boston. Oh, really? Yeah. And he had a very good position and, uh, he even at that time ha- had a company car. And I mean, nobody knew or, or, or had any suspicion or there was nothing to ask about because they were married already and all they had to do is, uh, find the right apartment and my father bought the furniture and the rest. Huh. They went down to, to the United States. And what was your father's first name? My father? Yes. Uh, Otto. Otto. And when you were in the, uh, military, Ern- were there other half-Jews in your unit? No. Not that I know of. I was the only one. You were the o- Otherwise, otherwise, my, my lieutenant or captain would have told me. The, um- No, I was the only one who had to leave. Did many of your comrades know that you were half-Jew? No, nobody knew. Were you scared that they might know? No, but, uh, you know, at, at, at, at that time you didn't tell, uh, anybody. Yeah. Like, uh, later on in, in civil life, people looked at me, "Oh, a young man like me wasn't still in the streets of Berlin." I told people, I, I, I, uh, I was useless by heart. And the funny thing happened- Ernst? My, my wife has told me about that I speak too loud. Do I speak too loud? Uh, uh, y- you're okay, Ernst. (laughs) Uh, tell Lydia hello for me. Yeah, I, I should say hello to you, Jason. So, uh- So you told people you had a heart problem. I had a heart problem. And they believed you? Yeah, they, they, uh, they believed me because, uh, I, I, I didn't look too healthy because there was... I never was... bu- butt pain or anything like it. No, I, I, as a baker who has so much insight, you look pretty, uh, pretty white and tired and we, uh, we didn't speak too much because we had all those, uh, bombing affairs in Berlin. And I had to help all my neighbors, uh, mostly women and children, to get into the bunker when, when the airplanes came and, uh, I had to help them putting, uh, tarp cloth on their windows and when the glass was broken. And I was a lively man and, and I, I, I even belonged to, to something like a guard unit for our house where I had rented a room, uh, and other houses that we checked the roofs and the attics that there were no little, uh, uh, uh, uh, brand bombs, you know, little bombs that, that make a fire. Oh, incendiary. Yeah. And we, we had to go up, uh, uh, search the shelters from house to home. It, it was made possible that you could go from one house in the attic to the next one. Okay. And we had to fix that and we, we had to put, put tent on, on, on some, uh, there, somewhere there, you know? Uh-huh. Yeah. So those airplanes, uh, let 100 go and they have to fall down and so many, it hits so many houses or doesn't hit on... or three big bombs come and there was no house at all. Okay. So those were the times of, of the time I, I lived in Berlin, worked as a baker and pastry cook before I got to, uh, OT. Now, were, um, were you dating... Uh, what was the name of your girlfriend at this time? Oh, she has a last name with a... (laughs) She, she's, uh, originally, uh, a citizen... or she was at the time, uh, a citizen of Czechoslovakia. Oh. Her father, her father, he was a... She, she was in, in a camp too. Lydia was? Lydia, yeah, Lydia was a, was in the forced labor camp too. Which camp was she in? (clears throat) She, she was in Berlin. She was, uh, uh, first worked in a, in a, in, in a nursery, in a, in a, you know, like a garden and plants and things like. Uh-huh. And later on she was transferred to, uh, clean up neighborhoods that they bombed out and, and, and clean up the bricks and, and, and, and the pieces and, and things like that. Oh, did she have to clean up- Before that, she was forced to work as a... Before those two things happened, she was forced to work for a company that, uh, was in technical engineering and she had to clean up, uh, the buildings and the homes and the floors and the furnaces. And but she do handy work there before she got into that nursery. Oh. So she wasn't sweepers and cleaners and stuff.... be a forced labor camp. Uh-huh. Did you ever hear about it? Not too many, about the women. Oh, in w-... never heard. And in our case- Oh, in your case, yes, I've heard about several of the- That, that's where I came from. Yeah, you'll... Uh, at the end of my book, uh, you'll read a lot about the OT camp. Ah. Now, Lydia, how many, how many women were working with her in the forced l- uh, labor camp at the plant nursery? Uh, I, I wouldn't know. I'm an FMX guy. Is she there? Yeah, she's 300... She says about 20. 20? Yeah. And what's Lydia's last name? She, she put that on in, in, in our application. Yeah. And, um, yeah h- what is Lydia's, uh, maiden name? Ah. Lydia Schindler. Schindler, that's right. Schindler. Schindler. And, um- Because that... She was hit. When she married me and became a... By German law, she became a, a, a German citizen when she married, uh, a man who is a German citizen. Uh-huh. So... But her father worked in Ber- in Berlin. Uh, he married a German girl, so she's not Jewish. Oh. Oh, the funny thing is... (laughs) The funny thing is, her father was Jewish and he, he was brought up in a Jewish tradition and has a Jewish face. Uh-huh. And, uh, this makes, that makes a, makes a, when it comes to religion, more Jewish than me. Uh-huh. Even though I was the son of my mother and my Jewish... A religious mother any child of a Jewish, Jewish woman is Jewish. Uh-huh. But I was brought up in a Christian faith. Uh-huh. But you feel Jewish, right? I feel Jewish. Oh, I am very, very Muslim. I think we talked about that yesterday, but- Yeah. ... at that time they, they took me out of, of my regular life and put me in the hard place of, of, uh, being an apprentice as a baker. Uh-huh. I didn't realize that I was, um, somebody else, a second-class citizen. I was foolish not to... I mean, I, I understo- didn't know what was going on. Uh-huh. So- Now, when you entered the military, did you suddenly feel like, uh, you were equal again? I, I felt like everybody... Uh, you know, at that time, uh, everybody in the gospel was very, very friendly. Uh-huh. There were, there were no, uh, uh, no prejudice with your, uh, fellow, uh, soldiers of what, what religion everybody is. Uh-huh. Uh, but I mean, I had to make all my leaders, uh, declarations when, when we first, the paper lost over here. Uh-huh. So, uh, I, I, I had a... Here in America I, I had a couple discussions with the Jewish people. They said that, "Didn't they say that you're not gonna wear-" That you served in the military? Yeah. That, that we, we, we half Jewish people were in the military. Uh-huh. And, and I mean (laughs) I wish I had your book at that time (inaudible) (laughs) Well, thank you. Yeah. Be- because it's, it's such, it's such a mixed thing. Uh-huh. And it's such an individual thing that, uh, uh, it, it takes, uh, every... It is diff- it was different for everybody. Uh-huh. You know how I, how I met, uh, how I met Lydia? No. Tell me. There was an organization, Bund non-Aryan Christians. Uh-huh. Oh, the Pollard Spoon. Pardon? Yeah, the, the Pollard Spoon? Uh, not, no, not, not this, but something like. What was it called? It was officially, uh, uh, uh, put into, uh, into the paperwork as a non, uh, a non-Aryan Christian. That's exactly I, I remember it is the way I, I recall it. And that's how you met Lydia? Yeah. But at the time I met her- Uh-huh. ... uh, the organization was shut, shut down. Uh-huh. The state didn't allow that organization to exist any longer. What year was that? I, I wouldn't know because by the time I entered that, that organization when I came back from the military- Mm-hmm. ... I was especially infuriated, uh, what, what already happened to Jewish people. So- What do you mean? Were infuriated by what? I was looking to meet other people like me. Mm-hmm. Did you know about the term mobber? Mobber? Yeah, mobber, I would have. Yeah, you knew that? Yeah. (laughs) I, I know that, uh, (laughs) I know that express. Mobber, I would have. They-... uh, personally we were very isolated. I mean, we lost our job and, uh, I remember myself there was another young man with whom I worked in the bakery and he wa- he had no papers left in any country. Uh-huh. Yeah? Uh-huh. And, uh, and that's why he was allowed to... He probably had a visa for, I don't know, to use from time to time or whatever. And he was my friend and we both, uh, uh, we are, we are two young men who put the two sticks together like, like, uh, uh, like we both learned English together. We went to, to, to schools where we could learn some English. We would go and have a beer together. We would go when there was a dance and we had money to go for afternoon dance together, you know? Uh-huh. And, and in those times things like this, that was by the shop key, you know? By, by the shop then. I mean, we were young men. Yeah, absolutely. I, I started at 16 and, and I, and, uh, I hadn't dropped out by here. So, uh, it was at, in that time that you had to, uh, have some better things to do than, than to sit and write. Yeah. Uh, well, when, um, when you were in the military and you started finding out that after you'd served that you tried to apply for an exemption to stay in the military? No, no, no. Did you know about that option? No, there, there was no option, because those people... See, I, I, I didn't look in my paper to, to get the name of that military base I was. It's, it's, it's very well known, uh, I could put my finger on a map if I wanted to. Those things I didn't ask for and, uh, there was no choice for me. It was just, it's like I said, it was just double channels for everything was done and at the time we needed for that, uh, moment we can really, uh, let go, uh, we had to have farmers in the surrounding areas to, to do their work. So every morning we loaded up a big, big, uh, uh, wagon and, and drove past the farmers and, and we had to have them do their work. And that took about, uh, I don't know, about three weeks, and then, uh, things got cleared and we got our, our papers. But one thing they didn't do, uh, they didn't give us any, any, uh, uh... We just been there, let go, uh, it didn't say honorably or not honorably. They just, they just let us go, you know? Huh. Now had they given you an option to apply for an exemption would you have applied? No, no. No, nobody ever asked me or, or, or, or gave me, gave me a reason to say I would like to stay or go back to where I, I came from. And, and I, I think by that time they already were marching into Russia anyhow, so, uh, I, I had no interest to say I, I (laughs) I want to stay any longer in the military than I did. Uh-huh. So, I didn't know what was, what, uh, what happened to me, but, uh, in my case it was never very, very difficult to go back to, uh, into the bakeries and pastry shops I knew in Detroit. Uh-huh. So, uh, anybody would take me because I had, uh, very good, uh, uh, papers and I was very good. Uh-huh. I, I even, I even had, uh, one, uh, contest, uh, between, uh, uh, the young, uh, uh, this, this other, uh, baker, uh, pastry people. Uh-huh. Because of the Rosh Cheshanah. Uh-huh. The Rosh Cheshanah. Yep. And, uh, that happened through the state school. I had to go once a, once a week- Uh-huh. ... to go to, uh, uh, again to school. And there was one time I remember that at the end of that form you had to fill out, uh, I didn't say that I was non-Jewish. Oh, they actually asked you at the bake- bakery contest whether you were, uh, Jewish or not? Yeah, we all had to fill out a form and at, and it said there, "Please when you fill out you are to, to do mention if you are, uh, Arabian or not Arabian or, or what, what your religion or..." So that means at that time, you know, they actually took it off about to find out we were Jews. What year was that? This, this must have been between '34 and, and, and '37. Oh, geez. While I, while I was a baker. No, it wasn't at, on the pastry shop. Huh. It wasn't at, on the pastry shop. It must have been, uh, between '37 and '39. '37 and '39. Uh-huh. Isn't that crazy, Ernst? Huh? Isn't that crazy? Yeah, uh-... the pastry shop as an apprentice. And the master, uh, the owner, he had a very high position in, in the union of the pastry cooks. Yeah. Mm-hmm. And he was a certain age, and I knew, I knew for sure he wanted to, to be in it. So I thought, "Oh, forget about nothing is going to come out," because they were under, uh, in, in Berlin there wouldn't be event contest. Mm-hmm. Anyhow, to illustrate the point, uh, we, we got together and formed to write big book and we would go to him like for being the victor for, for Germany. You know? Mm-hmm. There, those five people, uh, they're competing, uh, who was the best and the best would be sent to, to, to Hamburg for, for the nationals. Mm-hmm. So I'm telling my father... I, I finally told my father what happened and he was terribly upset because he said, "That could have repercussions to your mother." Mm-hmm. "You do anything, do anything so that you don't lose that contest," because he knew I was like this, very competitive. Mm-hmm. So, and, and like I said, I had that master, uh, who was somebody in the union. And he could have not just been, been that thing. Mm-hmm. And, and, and... (laughs) So anyhow, he said, "I'll buy you a new suit and I'll buy you a hat, and please don't put us in more, in any more trouble than you've brought us already." Oh, no. No. We got together one day. We were all asked to get together in some very, uh, known pastry shop. And we were given different orders to do five different things in, uh, I don't know, in two and a half hours or whatever. Mm-hmm. So I figured, I figured I couldn't suddenly be a bad pastry cook because everybody knew I was a good one. Mm-hmm. I thought the best thing I did is that I, I don't hurry up. I do everything in slow time. And, uh, it worked, what I did. I did beautiful things and I was re- commended very much for how good I was, but I was too slow. Oh. So I got my suit and my hat from my father and I didn't get to go to Hamburg International. Oh. Somebody else also tried it. Uh-huh. Now, when you were in the... When you were in the military... I, I, uh, I'm telling you as a, as a, as a, as one of the jokes in my life, you know? Yeah. Yeah. That, that those things can happen. There's no lying. But, but in that time people were lying very often to people, uh, that had no right to know your personal story, you know? Uh-huh. And at that time, you told nobody that, that you were... They had to do it. Now, when you were in the military, did this sense of- They had to do it to separate an odd man, you know? Uh-huh. Things like that. Now, this sense of competitiveness that you had, Ernst, when you were in the military, did that drive you being a soldier? No, it, it, it just taught me to, to, to do everything very perfect. I, I'll tell you, I'll give you one example. Uh, I told you my father was in the military so long, 12 years plus World War I. Yes. That was about, uh, 16 years. And he was a, um, um, basically a Lieutenant on infantry or whatever. Mm-hmm. He, he talked about that the other day. That's correct. Very early in my life, um, uh, when, uh, th- th- you know, like, like, uh, like on, on, on, um... And so on, and over the years, uh, I got very good on them. I, I, I, I mean, I really could shoot very well, right in the middle. Because your father had taught you how to shoot on these air guns. Taught me how to. Oh. You know? And he liked that because then he had a son, and I was the only son, the other died, you know? Uh-huh. That, that, uh, could do like he once did. You know? Anyhow, when I was in training in Cottbus for, uh, on the pay, you know, we had to go, uh... We were, we were trained on all kinds of, uh, uh, guns, uh, hand guns. And for instance, uh, in the dark we had to take our, uh, what was it? Uh, 309 pistol. Mm-hmm. We had to take it apart and put it together again in so many, uh, seconds or minutes. Mm-hmm. Yeah? Mm-hmm. In the dark. Or we had to go out of town to, to the firing range and fire standing, kneeling, and laying, you know? Mm-hmm. And fire our gun. So, uh, to come to that base we had to march through that little town and march out of town till we came to that firing range. Mm-hmm. And then we started firing. And we did that once a week at least. Mm-hmm. So, uh, that's like all the other training we done. Uh, and I was so good all the time that I never had to march base. They always... (laughs)... there's a, um, there's a truck that brought all the equipment we needed for the firing range. Oh. I could ride back this way instead of marching, which took about, uh, almost an hour. Oh. Home. Did the military thank you for that? Yeah, they did and I could just lay down and wait till the other guys came and then we had, then we had lunch, you know? Mm-hmm. Did you get- Uh, I was a sharp shooter. Did you get, uh, the marksmanship award? No, I didn't get any aw- awards because, uh, that was really not in our, in, in our line of, of, of shooting. We were, we were panzer, uh, uh, shooters and, and, and not, uh- Infantry. ... uh, shooters. Every time they had to have four guys, I, uh, for instance, I was shooter one. Mm-hmm. I had a pistol. Shooter two had a pistol. Shooter three had a, had a, uh, uh, had, uh, uh, had a shotgun and, and shooter four had a shotgun. So, uh, it was part of our army, but they, that was just like every soldier had a, had a shotgun or a, or a hand gun or whatever. Oh, okay. You know? So did you choose the anti-tank unit? No, I didn't choose it. I was just put there. Oh. We didn't, we had no choice where to go or, or, or what. We were ordered to be at the train station and we were ordered to Cottbus, which is about east from Berlin, not too far away. I just think because my parents visited there one time. All right. Now, why did your parents visit? Because I have an uncle who has a train station. Uh, he is a (laughs) former driver and then you, then you see me. Why did your parents visit you there? Uh, because, uh, after the basic training there was a period of, of, I think, uh, four weeks that parents could visit us. So my father and my mother came down. Huh. Now, what did your mother think about you serving in the military? Yeah, I mean, they both wanted to visit me and because they never knew when they see me the last time that I, I was going to be shipped out or going someplace else. Yeah, did your mom find it strange that she being a Jew had a son- Yeah, she, she found everything strange. She did? I mean- Huh. She, she felt very much hurt that she, um, brought myself and my sister and my father to the position we were in for, uh, I, I, I always, uh, I mean, you know the expression that there's a- almost no other mother who loves their children like a Jewish mother? Yes. She, she loved me dearly and I loved her dearly. And, uh, and we couldn't, uh, the strange way I was ever holding it against her in, in, in any situation. Mm-hmm. As I said, uh, she got me into the trouble, you know? Mm-hmm. Because I, I was always, always in a certain trouble. I was not as in, in my regular way of, of, of living. Mm-hmm. And I, I could have a resen- resentment and I know of people who had a resentment of their Jewish father or brother- Mm-hmm. ... that they were put in that position. Mm-hmm. It may be because, uh, Mother has used it in a bigger picture, "Why does this happen to me?" Mm-hmm. So those things happened, but it never happened in our family. Oh, interesting. What specifically you wanted to know who, who died in, in concentration camps? Yeah, you said your grandparents and then the brother of your mother and his wife and two sons. Yeah. Who else? And he, and he... Oh, I'll tell you about, uh, about the, the brother was, um, a, a communist, but thought that he was Jewish. Mm-hmm. And he was known to police to be in several protests in earlier political, uh, rev- During the Weimar Republic? Yeah, and from, from the transport that, uh, Mr. Hadley in South Slovakia- Mm-hmm. ... do you remember of Heil Hitler? Yes. Um, most of them were shot and consecrated- Mm-hmm. ... during that time? Yes. He, he, he shot, he shot, uh, a bunch of Jewish people. That's what happened. Mm-hmm. And one of them was, was the brother of my, my, uh, my mother. So he was living in Liddes? He was living in concentration camp. He was shot to death. It was a father, uh, who was a friend of my mother's. Huh. That is a story I've been told, uh, by my mother. And where did his wife and two sons die? Well, in Liddes, uh, two sisters were taken away. What, of your mother's? Yeah, and one sister, um, was lucky. She was married and had a little, little daughter. She was able in the last moment to immigrate to England as a housemaid and her husband as a gardener. I don't know how she managed that, but they're there because, uh, my mo-... to get out of Germany. What happened to the other sister? The other sister, uh, got married to, to, to an Asian guy. So I would say they're all, all related, yes? And so, the first person I, I, I saw that I didn't like was, was a neighbor there. And they are. Did she have any children? No, she didn't have any children. But she was married to an Aryan? Yes. And she lived in Berlin and she was the first person I, I put my direction onto to meet up with her. So who else did you lose in the Holocaust besides your uncle and grandparents? Oh, and then, uh, uh, then there was Aunt Kathy. Sh- she died in, in, uh, Augen. What's the name of it, Reis- Rei- Ravensbruck? Yep. Back home. The one that looked like hers that you sometimes see on TV, put on top- Uh-huh. ... of homes. She died there. And, and, and probably, probably other cousins, I didn't know. You know, but those are the ones I know. Huh. Uh- Now, um, did you, did you hear, did you know about the deportations from Berlin, uh, Jews? Well, I, I knew about the things from, from, from the beginning of, uh, I mean, from the Kristallnacht, uh, to the time they collected all the Jewish people. They, they knew we were Jewish. I mean, I, I, I knew about that. And she grew up in there, and when she was old enough, I don't know what age, maybe 12 or 13, um, we told her about, uh, that we are, is Jewish and, and whatever, you know? Mm-hmm. And, uh, she stayed with, with us and we had to move. And we didn't find a... Anyhow, she got into high school and she got into college, and, and she even, even joined another Christian church that was one large, uh, uh... They were very active in helping people going to prison and talk to prisoners and, and things like that. Mm-hmm. Anyhow, we left it up to her to be a Christian or, or a Jewish person. Mm-hmm. And, uh, several times, uh, uh, let me say two times, she almost married a Jewish person. Yeah. And she already been to school, uh, as a Jewish rabbi to, to teach in the Jewish synagogue. Mm-hmm. And then, you know, she was a free artist, but came back. Uh-huh. I told you that she got a master's degree in painting. Uh-huh. She was a free and young, active, uh, person. And she got too, too sweet about getting married, and she got out of that, that connection she had with, with a very nice and handsome Jewish lawyer. Good. Yes. Mm-hmm. And, uh, what, what... And she did that two times, uh, besides that she and other friends who were Christians. Mm-hmm. So, uh, you know about the '60s, you know? Yeah. She married people who were different after the '60s. Uh, boys and girls were different. There was a sex drive liberation and, and, and everything else. But she, she was a very good and orderly and nice girl, but, you know, in the time you, you were freer than, than we grew up. Mm-hmm. If, if I want to say so. And anyhow, from home and got married, she married, uh, uh, a guy from New Hampshire, who was, uh, only two years involved us. That's the name now. This is your grandson? So what, what happened now is, her new partner takes her to the Jewish synagogue on certain days and certain holidays, and she takes him to a Christian church on certain days and certain holidays, you know? Oh, that's- It's, yeah, it's unbelievable. You know? But it comes down to, to what I told you at one time, that initially you are as unbelievable through him, both the shape of your Jewish past and the shape of your Christian path. And, and you can get out of that very easily. Mm-hmm. You can, you can get out because there, uh, there are so many things, uh... When Maria Sikta, I was born in, I was born in Korschen, which was Germany at the time. I was born when my father, uh, with his, his, uh, wife, and then they moved to Berlin after the war was lost in 1918. So I only spent, uh, 50 years in, in Korschen. And, uh, then, uh, he had to separate her from our family. She had-Dass er mir gesagt hat, wenn du den musst, dann sagst du "Ich bin ein Amerikaner", verstehst du? Mhm. Und dann bist du ... (ahnt unverständlich) Ich habe eine Freundin, die ist auch amerikanisch, weißt du? Und ich stehe zwischen zwei Elefanten. Mhm. Und er sagt: „Ich bin ein Deutscher." Und meine Ehefrau und ich, wir sind eine gemischte Gesellschaft. Und was er tut, ist, er bringt mich in einen Konzentrationslager nach Amerika. Er sagt: „Ich bringe euch nach Amerika. Ihr seid bald in den Händen Amerikas." Er ist also eigentlich die einzige Person, die für meine Familie da ist. Meine Frau und ich, wir sind allein. Unsere Tochter ist in einem Konzentrationslager. Sie heißt Kerstin. Mhm. Und er sagte mir, dass er mit einer anderen Frau hierherkommen würde, mit seiner Schwester Ingrid, verstehst du? Mhm. Sie haben viele Bücher geschrieben. Und sie hat diesen Literaten aus New York zu sich nach Washington hier geholt. Weißt du, meine Tochter ist 67 Jahre alt geworden. Mhm. Er hatte zwei Söhne. Einer ist Anwalt hier und einer ist Rechtsanwalt hier. Und er wollte nur ein bisschen für seine Familie da sein. Aber er musste arbeiten gehen. (Tonbandräuspern)(white noise)