[HEBREW TRANSLATION] This would be a memoranda in the internal memo file for Raikes. Um, memo should be dated today, February 12th, two thou- Sorry, February 13th, 2002. Ray, um, mediation session, comma, February 12th, 2002. First paragraph. On February 12th, 2002... Plaintiffs and defendants in the reference case gathered for a mediation session, period. L. Graham, G-R-A-H-A-M, E. Bell, comma, III, comma, provided as mediator, period. Uh, for the plaintiffs, comma, David Tobin, comma, Steve O'Connor, comma, David Comforti, C-O-M... I'm sorry, C-O-M as in Nancy, F-O-R-T-I, comma... And Francis A. Kane were present, period. Jane Adams and June Devenndorf participated via telephone, period. For the defendants, comma, Steve Neuman, comma, Laura Parsky, comma... Samuel Mayer, M-A-Y-E-R, comma, Michael Curtin, comma... Craig McCann, comma, and I were present, period. Happy. Um, after Francis Kane, uh, I need to add the May for Francis Kane. So cut off the "and Francis A. Kane," and do, comma, Francis A. Kane, comma, John Hoffer, comma, and Richard Allridge, A-L-L-R-I-D-G-E. And I think I said, "Were present." Period. This memorandum recounts some points discussed during the mediation session, period. It includes my thoughts and impressions and is not a chronological or verbatim account of the discussion. Period, new paragraph. O'Connor began by indicating that what was set up in the mediation could also be used- You have your escape from New York. Get one from good as far as you over Michigan. They put them in a refugee camp. First world commuting. The border... You probably know that story. Mm-hmm. It was in Southern magazines, uh, a year ago. Mm-hmm. I forgot the names of, uh, one woman who, who took it into- Uh-huh. ... her hands to, uh, be the best hand for those refugees, Jewish refugees from Europe. I think they, they took a ship from Lisbon and, uh, they had news collected from all over Romania, Bulgaria, and, and, and the eastern part of Europe. Uh-huh. Now, uh, honestly, do you feel Jewish? Yeah, I felt Jewish from, from the moment, from the moment on, I had to leave, uh, the gymnasium. You know, I was in, in, in Latin, French and English, and I was trying to get an educated young man. I played the violin, and I was, uh- So, you were kicked out of school? ... almost to, to the time I was 16 years old and I played my first two violin concerts. I played in a, in a school orchestra. I played solo to, uh, schuls- the school team every year a couple times, and things like. I was, I was not prepared for the life I, I really lived. Yeah, but- But I know today that that hard life made me, made me a good man. How did it make you good? I am, I am hard. I am hard. I... Uh-huh. I, uh... I mean, you can put me dead on bread and water and I would be still alive. Uh-huh. You, you know what I mean? Uh-huh. Yeah, oh, absolutely. You've been in my house and you maybe think, uh, it's a little bit deluxe and, and it looks a little bit soft. But, uh, uh, I like, uh, I have, like, beautiful things. That's, that's, that's one thing. And my daughter, uh, is the same. She got a master's, master degree in fine arts. And, uh, uh, it must come from my Jewish past. Mm-hmm. Because my father comes from a big farm family and got into the 12-year military con- contract. And they got into the, uh, SS and he made all their examinations and he got into the government. So he spent 12 years in the army? Yeah. He knows that. We used to call them, if, if you understand the Germans, (German). Yeah. We called him (German). Uh-huh. They, they, they gave themselves to the army for 12 years. And they had the opportunity afterwards to be accepted at the examinations and stuff is, could work for the German government. And that is what he did later on. Mm-hmm. Well, what, how- Now, uh, I- How old were you? I came up in a very, uh, comfortable, uh, world. Mm-hmm. And then I woke up and then I stepped into a literal (coughs) deluxe, uh, pig lot. Mm-hmm. The sheep and work and hard work and long hours and, uh, uh, hardly any free days. Mm-hmm. And, and I don't know what. Anyhow, y- you asked me the question, uh, when I, I became Jewish. That, that was the real moment I, I, I felt that, that now I'm Jewish. You know? Yes. Was when, was when you were ki- That I started to, to, to suffer. Yeah, so... And, and when you first started to suffer, was when you were kicked out of the gymnasium? Yeah, I was kicked out. I had to go because my father, uh, found a, a, a, a person, uh, who had, uh, some understanding for my situation and wouldn't say I was...... all accounts now. Basically, from all accounts, now I'm at 16. 16? Yeah. So your father took you out of the gymnasium at 16 so you could be apprenticed as a baker because he knew your life was going to be difficult at the school? I, I mean, the reason that I had to go into a trade was because, uh, the, the, the Nuremberg laws didn't allow us to be professionals, go to university. That, that was more simple and, and, I mean, everybody knows that. Uh-huh. They're not supposed to go to university and, and be professionals. Mm-hmm. Such as lawyers or engineers or, or doctors or, or whatever, so at the time I was very young. I, I didn't know what I'm going to be, but, you know, like a d- this young man- Mm-hmm. ... I, I thought, uh, I, I, I make my own, uh, my good way into, into life. Got it. When did you find out that your mother was Jewish? Oh, oh, from, from, from their letter. So you knew as a child that she was- From, from their letter. Uh-huh. But I mean, at, at... I'm born '18. Uh-huh. So, uh, nobody knew anything about it until '32 or '33. Mm-hmm. So, uh, that was not a problem, so my father asked my mother that, that, uh, that their children are being brought up in the Christian way. Oh- So there was no connection except the sisters and brothers and, and parents who came to us on, on birthdays and holidays and Christmas and I don't know what. And they were altogether Jewish and Christian and, and celebrating Christmas, so, uh... And, and, and my mother went over and, and celebrated their Jewish holidays with them. Did you ever go with her? Sometimes. But, but I, I wasn't going to, uh, to make it feel that that was something, uh, strange for me or something different for me, uh... I mean, it was definitely a religious thing and not a political thing, so... Mm-hmm. So, uh- So, in 19- I don't know how we got into that. Oh, no, it's interesting and thank you. Um, so in 1935 when the Nuremberg Laws came out, did you talk to your mother and father what you should do, maybe leave Germany or- No, I, I, I tell you what happened in my case, uh, I had, I had a cousin of my mother, she had two hotels. And she visited, uh, uh, Berlin in, uh, uh, and us, uh, twice or three times a year. And she said, uh, uh... And we talked about those things because before the... There's, there's always a rumor. There's always a year before something happens, or half a year before something happens, rumors are going around. Mm-hmm. And she said, um, "Don't make a problem out of it. Uh, let the, let the boy be in, in the food business and he can make his money or his living in every country in the world." Mm-hmm. So when my father, uh... And, and, and she was, she thought it was good advice and, I mean, at first, at that time, good advice. Uh-huh. But I mean, it was hurting my, my, my pride or I don't know what. You know how young men are. Uh-huh. They want to be very, uh, sophisticated and dainty and everything. Uh-huh. And suddenly I was a member of the lowest trade in Germany, that is, uh, being a baker, is a very... I mean, we had the lowest staff of all the trades there are around. I mean, uh, a truck driver, an, an plumber, and I, I don't know what. Uh, so you could be only the dumbest people who didn't know what to do with their life, they became a baker. Uh-huh. That's the reason that my, my, uh, certain intelligence and my, my pride, uh, my... or whatever you want to call it. Yeah, how, yeah, how did you come begin to be their master, Ernst? Oh, you know, uh, they already wanted me after the three years, uh, I was as a baker. I was, I was 19 then. Uh-huh. But, and, uh, since I al- already had a contract for the two years as a confectioner, they let me go. Okay. Because, you know, I made it all three years as a, a apprentice and then you make your trade examinations. Mm-hmm. So, and then instead of beginning, uh, two years as a confectioner, as, as a, as a pastry cook, uh, they let me do as a two-year apprenticeship. Mm-hmm. And then I wanted to do it. (laughs) Then I was 21. Mm-hmm. And then I wanted... My, my father already had made connections where I should be on the cocoa project. Mm-hmm. So, and, and they came to me and said, "No. We, we, we, we don't, uh, let you do that. You, you got to do your, your army service." And we started this, like it was at that time, uh, that you had to go into the Arbeitskampf. Mm-hmm. Is that something you understand in German? Oh, yeah, yeah. Arbeitskampf, Arbeitskampf? That was in '39. Mm-hmm. So, uh, and, uh, and strangely enough, uh, funny thing happened to me. Like I said, I was very big. Uh-huh. And I was just, what's in German? 172. I- Mm-hmm. It was the lowest they would accept, but I was very healthy and we wanted me to do a, to be in a special command that was sent every year to Nuremberg, uh, meeting. Mm-hmm. They had a big march and a big, uh, conference in the big, uh, city of Nuremberg. Uh-huh, 1939? That's right, in 1939 and I was taken away with, uh, 1000 or 2000 guys, one from, from over the... 150 guys in the company I served. Mm-hmm. They were...... uh, us, uh, us, uh, us as a American army. They said, "Uh, uh, let's, let's, uh, uh, shut down some businesses." Were you blonde and blue-eyed, or- Huh? Were you blonde and blue-eyed? When I was what? No, did you have blonde hair and blue eyes, or- I only had blonde hair. And what color eyes? Uh, I got, I got, uh, I got brown eyes. Brown eyes? Yeah. Blonde hair and brown eyes? (laughs) See? (laughs) Now, is that one reason why they took you, because you were blonde? No, they took me because, (laughs) I'll tell you. I, I made a big joke. Uh, I made a big joke and tried to explain, uh, my, my, my personal, uh, uh, and, and, and, uh, you can put your sight, or you can look at it from two sides, how you look at stuff, all right? I wasn't in a war, uh, but we were supposed to enter our AP armor and things. Mm-hmm. And so the war in Poland started. Mm-hmm. So, uh, we, we, we, we needed to follow the army into Poland. Okay. And I... We got new outfits, uh, you know, boots and, and socks and, and everything from top to bottom. Mm-hmm. And I'm marching myself into a, into having a big hole in my foot from the new, new boots I had on and, and things like. Mm-hmm. And marching and marching and marching and, you know? Mm-hmm. And it was so bad that they had to, had to send me back, uh, to a hospital in Germany. Oh, whoa. I didn't see much of the Polish war. Hmm. I only saw the beginning. Hmm. And they sent me a... Another conference was canceled because that war in Poland started. Mm-hmm. So, um, anyhow, it didn't take long and they put me, uh, uh, I was here, my foot was here. It took very long, but my foot was here. And, uh, uh, they put me, uh, into the city of Cottbus. Mm-hmm. And there was, uh, a big military base and they changed me for, for, uh, a unit that was supposed to fight, uh, tanks, anti-tank. Mm-hmm. I was with a group of anti-tank, uh, people. Mm-hmm. With their special large cannons. There's two kind of ammunition. One's the, the one that would explode before it, it maybe touches the panther. And one that would go through and then explode. Mm-hmm. But, uh, it's better than the other side. Mm-hmm. And I was in, uh, in the German army. And this was in Europe, right? I mean, behind the army and with the army in Holland, Belgium, and France. Mm-hmm. And I still got my military books that I went through that Battle of Dietz. How do you spell that? Dietz. Dietzen. Oh, Dietzen, yeah. Yeah, Dietzen. Yeah, and, um, now did... When you were with this anti-tank unit, did you actually destroy tanks in France? Yeah, we, we shot at them. A lot of times. Did you destroy many? Did you destroy many? You know, that, that war through Holland, Belgium and France was such a fast one, that, uh, uh, we, we, we didn't have any big battles. We rather were following and shooting after them instead of being, uh, um, fought against us, you know? Uh-huh. I mean, that, that was a good, a good surprise for, for, for, uh, for the Holland, uh, and the Belgium and the Fr- I mean, it, it got, it got sticky in France, but Holland and Belgium was a easy thing. Mm-hmm. And, uh, the end, the end of that western, uh, war was, uh, Detroit. Mm-hmm. And after that, we were used as, uh, occupation army. So, you, do you remember actually destroying any tanks? We were shooting at them. But did you destroy any? Yeah, they, they, they stopped running. So did they explode? One, one of the techniques, uh, is that you change all the, that you change all the time positions. Mm-hmm. Don't make... Then, then the tanks are shouldn't take anything you are anymore where you were shooting for. How many tanks do you think you, uh, destroyed in this- Yeah, I mean- How many? All of us can see where their am- artillery is shooting from. Mm-hmm. I mean, you can, you can see that. So, and, and you are shot back at it. And since those cannons are very small and you can handle it with four men. Mm-hmm. They can always, uh, change your position. So you don't always follow, uh, one tank or another tank. You were, uh, uh, shooting enemies before, you know? Oh, okay. So, uh- Now, were you proud of your accomplishments in France? I mean, we, we, we were running through France like, uh, uh... It was a easy war. Let me put it that way. Yeah, were you proud of your... You know, did you feel proud? No, I wouldn't say too proud because, uh, uh, uh, there were, uh, too many, uh, civilians with nothing to eat and, and to drink. And there were too many wounded people. And, uh, uh, I used to be a... I used to be a, uh, uh, how you say? I used to be an instructor. A what? For, for lifesavers. For, for, for, for, uh, um, for guards. Mm-hmm. Uh, what do you call them? Like swimming pools? The lifesaver at swimming pools, or? Yeah. I mean, the guards you see at the ocean. Yeah, lifeguards. Lifeguards, right? That was the word I was looking for, lifeguard. Yeah. I used to be a real instructor for lifeguards. And this included, uh...... they were dead. And, uh, our publications needed some help. I would- I would ha- they would call on me and I wou- I would have to defend the ch- uh, people that they shot and so on and so on. So, uh, I mean, I did- I did in my life so many things and I did so many things in the war. And, uh, wha- what I said before, I- I kept everything in a decent way. I was not the type who, uh, who- (coughs) who would say, uh- who would hurt anybody or- or- or blame them or- or something. I just did my- my duty and- and- and- and what I was supposed to do. And, uh, I had people with- with food and- and things like... And, uh, I mean, I could tell you stories and stories and stories. Anyhow- Yeah, yeah, uh- ... it was the occupation in France. Oh, and they made me a- they made me a corporal. Like a biker? Yeah, like a biker. So I was a biker. Now, were you decorated? Did you get the Iron Cross at all? No, I got nothing. Mm-hmm. I got nothing. So, he- he used to say, uh, that I was a good soldier if we set out on a train in- from the west and they shipped us all across Germany. And we came close by Berlin near where- where I was at home. They moved us really close to the Russian border. Yeah. Mm-hmm. And these are living in the houses of those Polish farmers and- and- and because there was nothing else. Okay. And, uh, one morning, uh, our- our sergeant, uh, of the morning appeared, uh, said what we are going to do that day and so on and so on. And he said, "Here are some, uh, some, uh, letters from, uh- from our, uh, base in Germany and if there are any non-Jews in- in the company, you should report to the- to the camp." This is during the appel? Huh? This is during the appel, the roll call? Roll call. Right, roll call. Uh-huh. Roll call. When was this? Do you know what month- what month it was, uh, Ernst? Uh, just- it was just before, uh, as I said, uh, well, started with- with Russia. The- the Germans into Russia. So June of '41? That's probably four- June '41? I think a little bit later. Well, actually, Barbara Rosen- '41? Yeah, it could be May '41. Yeah. Yeah, there was a battle of Italy going. Yeah, they- they actually invaded Russia June of '41. Oh, yeah. So this must've happened in June or May. Okay, probably in June. Yeah. Well, do you have your- Um, I- I mean, I'm not telling you that for your book. I'm just telling you that in- it's my- my friend who knows about all those things. Yeah. Yeah, now, did you report? No, I- I didn't report, you know. (laughs) I- I can still see myself. I- I reported to my lieutenant. Mm-hmm. Because, uh, he was- there was this, uh, lieutenant for three or four, uh, anti-tank cannon. Mm-hmm. And then there- there were three groups and they had a gap, you know, anyhow. Mm-hmm. I went to my lieutenant because the captain was on- someplace else. Mm-hmm. And he... Uh, I mean, I reported that, uh, I'm supposed to go here and tell you I'm from the area. Mm-hmm. And he said, "You were Jewish?" And I said, "Yes, I am a Jewish fellow." "Oh, my God," he said, "I made you a corporal and you're leaving?" The people that stayed in occupation in France are much better than you because you're Unteroffizier score. Mm-hmm. You know? Mm-hmm. Yeah. Uh, oh yeah. What's that again? Yeah, Unteroffizier. Unteroffizier. Mm-hmm. Sure. So, I just wanted to say I was a regular good soldier with everything I was supposed to do, showed everybody that I can do anything everybody else can do. Now, were you nervous when you went to go report that you were a half-Jew? I- I- I played funny because I- I didn't know what was behind it. Uh, what do you mean behind it? Oh, the lieutenant said, "Bi- give me day tomorrow so I can read everything saying we won't be here," uh, from, um- from the other- the other base and- and- and military base in... Oh, I forget the name. Mm-hmm. I- I don't remember. Anyhow, he said, "Give me tomorrow and we'll talk- we'll talk about it." And he was all upset that- that he never thought that- and he thought that I- I- I was Jewish related, you know? Mm-hmm. Because that- that was already a- a- a certain point that Jewish people were- were separated from- in Germany for- to speak of- Mm-hmm. ... for- for not being, uh, uh, the- the white, uh, German people, you know? Mm-hmm. Uh, one of the elections we had a political- a statement that- that all Jewish people are not- not German, you know? Mm-hmm. They're not alike. Even though they were German for generations, you know? Mm-hmm. Some of us who were not normally even not German anymore. Uh- So the next day- the next day, what did your lieutenant tell you? He said he got the same result- he got the same result as the British, um, he said-... uh, with your, uh, with your comrades, uh, in the company, uh, they driver is going to drive you to the field there. There are far away, uh, spaces that have connection with those big trains going north and then back into Germany. Mm-hmm. And you go to the bathroom and you take that, that stripe off your, your arm because your papers are made up that you're still a soldier. Mm-hmm. You are just a regular soldier. Mm-hmm. And they will tell you when you come to the base, uh, what, what they, what to do with you and whatnot because as far as they can read and see, it's like your army days are over. Mm-hmm. Uh- Were you upset? No, I wa- I was never sick. I tell you, I've heard that story... I've heard that story told to many people, uh, many German friends. I, I was... I was always... I was always healthy, fit and happy. Good. Are they okay? Two and a half to three years, I was with the same unit, same old friends. And, uh, we visited, uh, from, uh... then we had, uh... when we were on, on, on leave, that we picked each other up from where we lived one night and we were parents of a... of a couple guys, you know? Mm-hmm. And, uh, then I took a photo to, to the guys and said, "This is my mother and this is my, my, my dad. And this is them and this is them in Germany." And they gave me, uh, addresses, uh, and, and telephone numbers and I don't know how. And even the lieutenant gave me things to take home and give to his parents and everybody was nice. They didn't know why I was that nice. They, they didn't know. Oh. But Lieutenant kept his mouth shut. Interesting. Hey, Ernst, I probably should let you go. Uh, it's getting late, but I'll, I'll call you tomorrow morning and we'll continue on talking. Yeah. I, I... (laughs) Like, like I... I'm telling you, I, I have a... there is a funny story here, uh, through the commission at the end. I visit all the parents I was supposed to, uh, visit. Mm-hmm. The time they later on, and nobody came back from Russia. Ooh. Not one from the company came back from Russia. Really? Yeah. It was like, uh, our lords or, or, our gods, or had an eye on me and kept me away from what's unpleasant there for Russia. Cool. So I, I had my doubts am I wanted here. Being what I was, you know? Mm-hmm. (laughs) So, so- Don't say like that. ... uh, uh, funny thing happened. Yeah. Ernst, thanks so much. I look forward to talking to you further tomorrow and even maybe seeing you. All right. And, and I will call you in the morning and we'll talk about, uh- I'd get together time if I, but I don't stop, you know what I mean? I don't stop. (laughs) Oh, no. It's wonderful. I still remember the two days I spent at your home, so- I, I, like I said, I only talked to you, uh, uh, to let you know a few things, but not to, to be part of your book. Yeah. I understand, Ernst. That is important. I appreciate it so much. Because I feel... I feel, uh... I feel like, you know when you first came to Russia- Mm-hmm. ... and you told somebody you came from Germany- Mm-hmm. ... they, they gave you a dirty look and that they have so many brothers and sisters and cousins who died in their war. Mm-hmm. And these are something like, you know, they got killed. Mm-hmm. Those were killed too from, from the American soldiers. Mm-hmm. So, uh, a lot of bitter ex-... uh, uh, it wasn't very, uh, well-wished. But as a German you, you, you had, uh, friends- Mm-hmm. ... for enemies in 1949. Mm-hmm. You know what I mean? Yeah. So, uh, so I right away checked in for, for, uh, for my citizenship papers and five years later, uh, 1955 I think, uh, I became a American citizen. Oh. Then I became a German citizen because, uh, back then like, the Germans are left in Germany because all they had in their mind is, "Why didn't they kill all the Yiddish people?" You know? Something like- Mm-hmm. ... about, uh, about the concentration camps and things like, "Why didn't they kill all of them?" Mm-hmm. Because they, they lost all their houses, they lost their, um, jobs, they lost their relatives and all they do is put it on the Yiddish people. They were responsible for anything. Oh. So, uh, it's weird. You're being followed because you're from Germany and then you're being followed in America. Oh. I wanted that to be the best American citizen I could be. Mm-hmm. You know? And, and, and for me, it's funny because, uh, anybody that I was fighting them, uh, face-to-face as, as, as a German, you know? Mm-hmm. And now I'm here as an American citizen. So you can see through all my life, there is that division between, uh, being one thing and the other thing in one person. Yes. I understand that. You know? I am like, uh, you know, as much as I come through intelligence or something, I'm one person, but in reality I'm, I'm a two people, you know? Mm-hmm.... in, in everything, I got very close to my father and we are like a half of my mother or even more of my mother. Mm-hmm. I'm finding out in all my 85 years. (laughs) 84 years. Mm-hmm. Uh, it's hard for me to digest that, you know? Mm-hmm. And it isn't, isn't, isn't easy to digest that because, there are two sides of yourself. And, and, and you realize that in, in a, in a, in your whole lifetime. Mm-hmm. That they have different opinions about different things. Uh, this isn't, isn't the one, and this isn't the other one. Mm-hmm. But something's in the middle. Mm-hmm. Some... Like, I have my own opinion about, uh, certain things that happen in Israel right now. Mm-hmm. You know? And I've, uh, collides with people who, who think I'm, I'm, I'm not a very good Jewish people. Mm-hmm. Because I have a different opinion. Mm-hmm. In, in certain things. Mm-hmm. Uh, so it's... If I start thinking about those times which I try to get out of my mind- Mm-hmm. ... I get very excited. Mm-hmm. And, uh, my doctor, the first thing he told me, uh, "Please, don't get excited." (laughs) "Be calm." Mm-hmm. "And don't have any bad excuses." Mm-hmm. "You can have good excuses." Mm-hmm. "But you shouldn't have any bad excuses." Well, Ernst, when we get off the phone right now- B- but, for instance, if I am very excited in relation to my parents- Mm-hmm. ... it's bad excitement for me. Oh, I don't... I'm sorry, Ernst. No, I mean, they're saying that I might not have a good night tonight, you know? Mm-hmm. Because I'm thinking of all the wonderful, wonderful things happened to me in my life. Mm-hmm. Or it could, could have been different or be, I don't know what. Mm-hmm. Um... Well, Ernst, I'll let, I'll let you go. If you can, if you're, if you're still thinking about it when we get off the phone, sit down and make a few notes for me. And I look forward to talking to you tomorrow. I'll probably call you around, you know, 10:00 or 11:00. Y- you're going to have my okay to, to, to publicize my story, though? Yeah. By, by, by law. I will talk to you. Yeah, I will talk to you before I publish anything. This is, this is, this is interesting for you. Yeah, I appreciate you sharing that. (laughs) And I will definitely keep you informed before I do anything. Just like I did last time. I sent you the whole manuscript and got your okay. Yeah. Okay. And, and anytime you, you want to visit me in, uh, in Berlin now, you, you invite, you invite your son to come here. Oh, thanks. And, and- I'll talk to you in the morning and maybe we can do that. Okay. Okay, Ernst. Okay. And I appreciate you calling me tonight. Hey, no problem, friend. Have a good evening. Okay, Ernst. Yeah, take care. And I, I wish you, uh, good luck with your interview on Thursday. And I wish you good luck as, as, for your life that you do the things you like to do. Hey, thanks so much, man. And keep on doing the things I like too. Hey, thanks so much. Really, I, I would have been a very good lawyer, at least, may- maybe, or a good surgeon, or a good lawyer, or I don't know what. Mm-hmm. I don't know today if that would, at least be happier than I, I was, really. So... Well, in my book, you're a goo- you're, you're, you're okay. Indeed, yeah, I'd rather be okay. Okay, friend. Okay. All the best. Thank you. Bye-bye. Bye-bye. What, what happened to your mother during the war? Uh... She, she worried all the time about, uh, our children. Mm-hmm. I mean, we were three children. I lost one brother drowning in the Berlin River. Wait, wait- That's why we, why we didn't die in Auschwitz in, uh, to be a nice baby. How old was your brother when he drowned? Uh, he was about, uh, five and half and I was about three years old. Uh, and, and how, how old is your sister compared to you? Is she three years older or? She was five years older. And she was, she was- Idlia and, uh, about two and a half years above. Okay, that- I was the youngest one. Did your mother have to wear the Jewish star? No, but, uh, uh, that, uh, that rumor came up at, uh, uh, in, in, in late '44, '45 that, uh, even the Jewish part of machines, uh, would have to have a star. Now, when you were sent off to the OT camp, was your father also deported? No. Why not? Uh, because, uh, uh, we, you know, when the bombing of the... I, I mean, the real bombing of Berlin started, uh, German and all the people, uh, were asked to evacuate, uh, Berlin. I, I mean, all the big cities. Mm-hmm. So, uh, my father was, uh, already retired in Kielce. Okay, so- From his ministry. So he took his wife, my mother, and they went to the place he was born. And where nobody knew, except for relatives, that my mother was Jewish. Oh, so they- They, they knew Father. So, did he actually go- Nobody both, uh, opened up their mouth about it. Huh, so he, they actually went into hiding? He... Yeah. I mean, people they asked in that time, and, and, and German and all the people- Mm-hmm. ... we were urged, uh, to, uh, to leave the big cities. So- So they went to, uh, what do you call it? Slovenia, Schlesien? Schlesien or Slovenia? Uh-huh. Where my father was from. Oh, okay. And what was the town? Uh, the town was Szonau. Soneau? Szonau. How do you spell that? S-Z-O-E- Uh-huh. ... N-A-U. Oh, Szonau. Okay. And-And what were you doing before you got called up? Where were you working? I was, uh, working as a baker in a bakery company for my old boss. Uh, I went through my... I worked for him when they had their bakery. Oh, in Berlin? And he was very, very glad he had me back because all kind of other people there in the service, and, uh, he really needed me. Now, now, this is in Berlin, right? This is in Berlin. Yeah. Now, how were you notified to report for OT? Uh, that I had to be at a certain time, uh, at a certain station, uh, uh, train station, um, on the edge of Berlin, I think it was. Was it Grunewald? Um, I think it was. Grunewald? Grunewald, yeah. Grunewald? And, uh- And, were you notified through the mail or- Yeah, I think through the mail. And was it... Who notified you, the Gestapo, or local employment agency, or who? I put... I couldn't read on that, on where that notice came. Now, when you got this notice, uh, were you nervous? I, I wasn't nervous (laughs) for myself because I, I was a kind of, of hard working person because I've been through, uh, over 20 years I've been through other things. I've been through military, I've worked very hard as a baker, so it didn't scare me this, this, uh, being put to work from an organization or, uh, organizational job. Now, when you showed up at this Grunewald station for your... to be deported to the OT camp, uh, were there other half Jews at the station? Oh, yeah. I mean, uh, (laughs) it was a... (laughs) It was a funny sight of people, all kind of ages, all kind of figures. Um, uh, in civilian clothes. Yeah. So I, myself, brought some, uh, food, some regular riding food to be in a, in, in, good, good condition because I see that, uh, uh, fall and winter is coming and I need them, you know? Uh-huh. And, and, and, here it looked like three quarters are army, you know? Right. And, uh, did, did, did you know that the other men there were half Jews? Yeah, yeah, oh yeah. Uh, did you find that strange? No, I, I, I, (laughs) I... Look, before the, before this started, like I said, Ober, Ober always went ahead of things to come. Mm-hmm. So he, he, he knew about it. It just simply happened all in one day and he, he did it all over Germany and so he did it in Berlin. Huh. So you knew about other deportations of half Jews? No, I'm... I asked about all the guys I was together with. Huh. And how many people would you say showed up on that day to be deported? Oh, uh, little bit north of 200 probably. Okay. And how many altogether were in the camp? There were... Uh, how did... No, uh, I misled you. Really there were not that many, uh, at that station, but later on in the camp we were about, uh, over 200, 250 maybe. 250? Yeah. And, um, were, uh, were most of these guys veterans of the Wehrmacht like yourself? No, they were... They were, um, uh, mostly civilian and, and, and, uh, some people who had been, uh, in the army, uh- Like Heinz Becher, and- ... some, some of us became my best friends later on, so somebody who was in our group, uh- Yeah, Heinz Becher. ... somebody who was, somebody was, uh, uh, putting out the news around Berlin. Yeah, that's Heinz Blum. Yeah, and somebody who was very active in infantry in the army, and- Yeah, Heinz Redlich. And, uh, we all, uh, we all had to, uh, ha- had to go through the same, uh, promotion. I went through the same, uh, thing, uh, uh, put out of the army. Uh-huh. Now- We were all civilians at that time. Uh, um, so when you got to the camp, were you mistreated? No, we... I, I was not mistreated in, in, in anything, or in any way of being mistreated, because we were on a, on a, on a military air force base. And, uh, the air force, uh, was supposed to pick us to work and, uh, and, uh, watch over us. Mm-hmm. So we, we had no, uh, no, uh... I don't know if from time to time even behaved himself because I, I, I was no help. But we, we, we only had to do it because we are forced to do that. Right. And they, they were not... Or I should say they were not political. Okay. They think the, uh, British and Americans ordered that. So your guards were OT or Luftwaffe personnel? Yeah. Were OT or Luftwaffe? Yeah, uh, more Luftwa- more Luftwaffe than OT. Huh. And they treated you fairly? They treated us dearly, yeah. Did you work- But we were careful. Uh, did you work long hours? We worked, uh, normal hours, but then, uh, we always kept, uh, material coming in Atlantic. Uh-huh. All the cigarettes would come in Atlantic. Uh-huh.... uh, uh- For, for the jet airplane. ... for the jet airplane. Now, at this point- And then, then the police, we had, we had to leave the, the barracks we were in, uh, when they had, uh, American and English bombers coming through. Oh. Because they did fly over us, uh, to go further to Berlin and other places. I don't know if they knew about us, uh- So you have a bomb? ... that, that they could've bombed for whatever they had, they were sending me there. So, uh, nothing's, nothing really happened to us. But, uh, we got the alarm, and together with, with our Wehrmacht, uh, Luftwaffe leaders, we had to run to a certain path in a field around, and, and wait out in the dirt, so. Oh. Then the alarm was over. Huh. Now, you're at- We'd work in the daytime, the alarm of the airplanes from American could hear it, then, uh, the night guard and the materials team and things, we kept really busy. Huh. Now, on the weekends were you allowed to go out in town or see a movie or? Uh, we used... The whole place was, um, Westerhauser was a big, big camp. Uh-huh. Yeah. So, when you got to this camp did you start thinking, "My future doesn't look too good."? Not really. We, we, we really took it in stride, I, I, I would say. Uh, most people, uh, didn't worry so much about what was going to be, to happen. That's what I, I heard from people I, I used to talk to. Mm. They, they always worried about their mother and their family because, uh, we knew if it went one way, it would go the other way. What do you mean by that? Well, uh, we figured, uh, maybe that, uh, the war is serving and we get out alive, or did we work as, uh, uh, wha- whatever has to, is going to happen. Okay. So we... Well, you see these people, they were very, uh, very disturbed and shocked, you know, because they'd never been in the military or they'd never been out of home or, uh, they'd never done anything and didn't know that kind of life. You mean the young ones? Eh, not, not, not the young ones. This one, one... I had a guy, I met a guy in a stable in, in Berlin, and he was a sailor. Uh-huh. And he was about, uh, at least 10, 15 years older than I, and he was really tough. Mm. And I thought that, that he was rather gentle. Oh. But, uh, don't worry about it. Don't worry about a thing. He loved being with me, and I guide him around up and everything. Uh, but, but be afraid. But, but be careful he should be. And, and, and he kept, (laughs) he kept to, to me and I, I think I, I was a good influence on him because he lost that fear over a period of time, and, and, uh, he wa- he wants to learn a lot. Uh, to work in a, in a, in a, in an old base we had, uh, in, in Vienna or someplace, to make love for all of us. Huh. Now, did you, did you meet him- To make love, to make love. Uh, huh. Uh- Now, did you meet- Oh, he had a extra job. He just had to be in the field in the cold and work outside with sand and cement and, and whatever, and he could make a job even though I didn't need because I've got that card. Now, when did you have this conversation with him, when you were being deported? Yeah, the first con- conversation was when I, I had in Berlin. Oh, okay. He, he... I don't know how, uh, how we met, uh, but our first thought was anyhow, he was from Berlin too. And, um, he would teach me later on and he'd make me a coat, a pair of shoes. I needed those then because I had nothing. Oh. So, and he made, he made a, a suit for my wife too. She didn't have anything. Huh. Now, um, Ernst, uh, when did you find out about the Holocaust? Um, I'll tell, I'll tell you. Uh, I found out about the Holocaust in, in a way that I met prisoners, uh, or that I met people who were in the SS and worked there in protective dress uniforms. Mm-hmm. It was in, what I told you, in Poland, uh, before, before the war started against Russia. Mm-hmm. And then, um, there was one time in my first, uh, camp, um, we came, we came to a point about the basic work was done and they needed, uh, so many people in other places. So they took that, the people, from that camp and sent them to another camp. Mm-hmm. And I was... That was Hieldersleben. The first one was Kauf and the second one was Hieldersleben. So they took us to Hieldersleben where we had to, uh, uh, work there, uh, building a munitions factory. And right there, we had our tent right next to it. Oh. One of the concentration camps. Oh, with Albert- That's right. That was there before we came and, and, and did the work in Frankfurt. And he had kind of watched over them and so on? Yeah. Now, uh, when you saw this, did you start, uh-... all my life being in a war or being in the military or being with, with somebody. Did you ever think of- I, I, I, I never worried too much. I, I on- I only was thinking about my mother. Right. So- But she, she was the part, uh, that was in my sense always in danger. Okay. And I mean, there's certain, I- I had that thought. You know? Right. Did you ever think about escaping? But this, this rules are saying to go on this, this, uh, uh, this is sign on the, on the, on the torch is a, uh, star of David. But did you ever think about escaping?(Static noise)(Static noise)(Static noise)(Static noise)(Static noise)(Static noise)(Static noise)(Static noise)(Static noise)(Static noise)(Static noise)(Static noise)(white noise)