[HEBREW TRANSLATION] ... take my maturity examination. (gentle music) Mm-hmm. And then it, uh, there and, uh, '33, '34, started a problem. The, uh, director of Gymnasium and all the teachers of course, in '33, before Hitler came, they were all SPD Left parties. And one day after Hitler was there, they had all the swastika on their, on their (laughs) coats. Immediately, the German teachers still the same, they, they look where are the most, um, and the best convenience because they, they are shifting their, their, uh, how do you call it? Their (german) is the German word. Uh-huh. They shifted it there, teacher though, so then- (laughs) ... started, started problem at school. Uh-huh. Because, um, they said, "Well, we go to a camp." But, uh, the, one of the rules of the Nuremberg, uh, (german) at school for Jews and Mischlinge where he should not participate on sport, not on excursion, uh, and quite a few things. Mm-hmm. But as, uh, uh, Kruger has written in his book, everybody, the, the rules were not very accepted. Everybody had his own idea what do we do with the Mischlinge. Mm-hmm. How did they call them? (German), Jewish Mischlinge or (German). So, but as the teachers, I said, "No, no, he should not go." And this was, I think, the first critical period, but used it, um, the family of my mother, very also industrious, had a lot of saying in this area, especially I think they used to have until '23. Mm-hmm. And they watched a little bit, uh, that nothing... This was the only thing which happened to me at school. Then I made my maturity examination in, uh, '35. Mm-hmm. And I had to my... Just we had a 50th, 50-year anniversary at the school. They showed me what I've written the, in, in German. The lecture which I had written was something about the third line. So... (laughs) What did you write? (laughs) Yeah. Yeah. Well, there were only three, three topics to choose. The two were, uh, one of the exertions and on the camp, what the others had done were, and that, well, not dissipate. (laughs) So I had to choose this fantastic thing. If you read that, you can't stop laughing. Huh. So I made my maturity examination. Mm-hmm. And this was in '35 when the things, Hitler, the more work industry was gone, improved. My father- What did you think of Hitler at this time? (sighs) What we thought? A lot of discussion in school. Well, half of the boys and girls, we were mixed, uh, co-education in class. I never had a problem. Mo- most of them used, of course, uh, they know what was going wrong. They know what was called Mischlinge that didn't have the word of what he would as a non-Jewish ancestor or something like that. But they know the family and they knew the family of my mother was more strong, very important. So all their laughter was sitting boys and girls in, uh, Hitler uniform and, and two of them had no Hitler uniform. So it went easy I make my mature examination. But when we had this golden rehearsal, 50 years, I have seen, how do you call it? (German). The judgment. The judgment, what they have written absolutely wrong. "This man, he is from a Jewish family, not the family of his mother." They are important, but he, uh, they have forgotten about how, how important my father's business was. Absolutely wrong. So s- good enough that this, uh, how do you call it? Judgment. Judgment didn't go to the university or to the Wehrmacht or something. It was so absolutely against the truths. Mm-hmm. But then you can see- Now, the judgment, I'm a little unclear. The judgment was from your fellow students? For now, from the, uh, from the, uh- Teachers? ... from the teacher group. Yeah. And they were saying, "Your father is Jewish." Jewish, yes. And he was Jewish and, uh, they'd forgotten that we were well-known industrialists. No, no. Jewish family and Jewish profession. Absolutely wrong. Mm-hmm. But the family of, uh, his mother saw that it was a sort of counterbalance. Mm-hmm. But I've never seen, that was 50 years, that's four or five, six years ago. I've seen the first time in my life. Mm-hmm. They have opened their files now in school. So I see what happened in '34 with my maturity examination. Well, you asked me what I thought about Hitler. Look, this ugly man and, uh, how to explain that to you? The, the Schlesinger family, we belong to es- the establishment, if you know what I mean here, always. Even my grandfather, when they (laughs) went to the United States, they were, if they arrived, they were all part of the establishment, which is different. Mm-hmm. They're not poor Jewish people from the East end. Mm-hmm. They don't matter. And they felt like that and they behaved like that. Mm-hmm. Lived in big houses.... so, um, Hitler and the ugly uniforms, wearing them. If you see my father, they were very elegant people, and these ugly uniforms. In that age, uh, we- you see that, uh, with different eyes. Ugly. And, oh, you see the poor fellows in my class, "You have to go to the Hitler Youth." "You are crazy." We got the, we were on the tennis court. Now, I had to stop playing tennis in the little, little, little town, even if the tennis club was founded by my family. There, I s- How did you feel when you were getting excluded? (sighs) It's too long ago to tell you, because maybe I was hav- uh, I was alone. I had no... I was a single child. And it was hard to discuss with even our clo- our close friend at school, but they were also young. Nobody had experienced what to do. Was there ever- The mentality, how to have... With my parents, (sighs) all the brothers, my mother, my uncles you have the, uh, mother's family, they tried to have, "Oh, wait, wait, wait." Mm-hmm. "We are here there to, uh, remember the past," as to rather than my mother. (laughs) It's, it's, it's... Well, you have probably are not the only one telling the stories like that. Mm-hmm. So, when they- Were they high-ranking SS officers? Hmm? Were they high-ranking SS officers? No, no, no, no. Just paying because they were rich industrials. There was a sort of group, <|ar|>فيردنز ميتجلينغ دي اس اس). After war, I think that helped them, (German), they were. No fighting, just had the uniform and paid and paid and paid. Mm-hmm. So. Now, uh, did your family have any difficulties at Kristallnacht? No. No difficulties? No. What is- And there is one thing written about me, because I was at university in that, in '38. Uh-huh. And (laughs) and, and I must... They, this is all done. There's a little research had done, me in Karlsruhe where I studied in the Kristallnacht. You will see that, I think, I think. No, no, the even in, in the, the little place, Bad Doll. Mm-hmm. Where my family lived, my, my, the brother of my father was still, uh, was running the plant, and he marched with the (German). Mm-hmm. They were, in their, into the rules, he had been a Jew, but he telling him any old Jewish, he said, "Oh, I'm crazy." So, what did he march? He marched with the SA? He- Who did he march with? No, no, no. He was... He didn't... No, no. He was against. Uh, he was absolutely on the left side. Mm-hmm. He... My... The brother of my father, uh, the man who died in, in, uh, in, uh, Auschwitz. This one. Schlesinger, yeah. Schlesinger, this one. He died as well? Yeah, good end, Ansberg. This is from Auschwitz? Yeah. This is from the, uh, from the big book in, uh, Koblenz. It's a list from Yashua from Israel. They have that big list where all the people and all, all that, right? It's, I have some- Yeah, that died in the concentration camp. Yeah, who were, uh, sent by transport number so-and-so, this. So, he was... Until '38, he was director of the plant (laughs). Now, how did you feel during this time? But when I tell you how I feel, this was the point. Yeah. I tell you it's hard- Were you scared? Hmm? Were you scared? I... It's hard to say. And you know why? I came back from Russia with a heavy malaria. What year was this? In during the war. I got the malaria. '42, '43? Mm-hmm. In '40, uh, it was... You know, I, I stayed with the army 'til '43, me. So, in four- the winter '42, I got a sort of called Volynishis fever, Volyny fever. It's a sort of malaria, five days fever. And one thing is well-known for that, you get sort of shifts in your memory. Mm-hmm. So, then, and sometimes, oh, all is coming back, but other years, they're gone. Maybe that's one thing. And the other excuse is, you know, the, the word (German)? Yeah. So, maybe that in that age, I like good life, uh, maybe I, I have, uh, drank what happened on that school. Maybe. I don't know. So, we... well, well, still man enough, I got skiing, and I got on vacation. Uh, so, I really can't tell what happened, but I like to play tennis then, but just by being sort of, well, cleverness or however, any, or a high efficiency at that. Well, keep away from the tennis court. (laughs) You can meet the girls somewhere else, (laughs) if not on the tennis court. They come at home, uh, dancing at home. Mm-hmm. And, well, anyhow, I had did... This is '35, I made my mature examination. Mm-hmm. And as an engineer was a tradition in my family, yes. Before you go to university, you have to do a practic- a practical term. Mm-hmm. And I was brought up in a, in a factory, off this living effect here. I know a lot of what was going on, you know. I was an expert before I even go to university. So, the tradition would have been that even if we are only shareholder, not owners of the Schlesinger works, I would have gone after, after my examination maybe by some ex- uh, some years overseas, I would join the farmer family. But, so I was... Every second day, I went through the factory. Mm-hmm. Oh, I still know a lot, that was my profession, was... Can you see this? My doctor examination. Mm-hmm. So, um, well, I should not do the practical termina- uh, term in, in the place I would to go on, out of this little village.... where all these problems were. Mm-hmm. So just by, mm, say, unconscious finding the right way, I went to Cologne to the big Humboldt Deutz. Uh, this is a big, uh, diesel engine-making factory, Deutz. Mm-hmm. So I went there also. But even then, uh, I had to make an entrance, or we, the family thought, "Well, we must be an if you go there and ask, 'Could I be between the 100 other practi- uh, boys who have the, uh, pre-universal, uh, practical term," it's better we have, um, somebody who said, "Well, this Mr. Schlesinger is younger than Schlesinger. Okay, he can." Mm-hmm. And I got a present from my parents for the maturity, and I was going skiing Switzerland, Austria, double, single lift. And there, I learned some man to know who was one of the directors of, of, uh, Humboldt Deutz Motoren. Deutz Motoren is well-known still, correct, Humboldt Deutz Motoren, well-known today. And then we had made sort of a family from such storm-braining what to do with him. I know him. That's . Maybe you know him. You, well, somebody telephone him, "Could he, could you help to make an entrance?" "Oh, yeah, sure." Mm-hmm. So I traveled to Cologne and joined the group which were split. There was, there were the academic engineers, who wanted to be academic engineers, diploma engineers- Mm-hmm. ... and there were the others, the non-academic group of engineers. You know, they're still a split in Germany. So, and, and the, the non-academics, they were all or SR. And the academics, they were sort of like . As I said, when we made maturity, all of Germany, half of them said, "Well, Hitler, Hitler, no." This was, that is one thing. It's my memory could be wrong, but I think it was that like, that out of the group who wants to be academic, uh, study to be an engineer, they said, "Oh, oh, Hitler, we are... we're interested in, in aircraft and in, in turbines or something like, leave that out." Mm-hmm. So then I started, it started to be that I really had to be careful- Hmm. ... because the always intervened, "So you must go to assembly in the factory room once a week or so." Not me. (laughs) Not me. So I, then I start to be, to learn that how to make, to be careful- Mm-hmm. ... to have good friends and to find good friends. Mm-hmm. And, uh, after a year, then, uh, the, the problem came up what to do, to go to, uh, what university. But they all asked, "What about ?" Mm-hmm. So I did in Aachen. This was the nearest one because that's a , so, uh, famous for system and research. And I went there with a friend which I learned at the . "Don't risk it. Don't risk it." . If you have, if you have seen it and you have signed it, no. So I... before this, uh, how do you call it? The , the, the, the form had been supplied, I didn't, uh, didn't make it. Hmm. Then what to do? Then my father said, "Well, well, the in Karlsruhe, we know the senator so-and-so, and we know a Jewish, uh, businessman, famous one, who invented this little thing where you lift a car." You know what you... you know, you probably have known, not known that in, in pre-war times, if you had a flat tire, you put out a little winch and you- Yeah, a crank. A crank, a crank, huh? Mm-hmm. And this man, he was very well-known, if you know from industry, a J- a man with a Jewish name, and maybe he was even Jewish. And the , even, even with him, he would live half time in Paris and half time in Berlin. He was a man like that. Uh-huh. He said, "Well, and you know and I know the senator so-and-so from here, senator, uh, of the board of director," so you would say the American term, "of the in Karlsruhe. Mm-hmm. "Well, let's see how we can make this." And this is also written in a little research from the . So I, (laughs) we made it. I joined the , but with a different elsewise. Huh. Did you write that your father was Jewish on this elsewise? No, no, no. But, uh, in the... with inner knowledge, I would s-... imme- immediately I would see the was yellow and for, uh, for Gypsies and Jews and negros. (laughs) They were, uh, different color. I was- So you had a yellow, you had a yellow. I had the yellow one. So a . A , yeah. That's right. So then at first, uh, then, uh, first day when we went to some, like, and two or three had seen that. One in an SR uniform, and two Norwegians that's seen it also. They knew about it. And just as, well, , they came to me, and I made good friends with this Norwegian group just on the very first day because they, somebody had seen this, this. And they asked you about it? Yeah. They didn't ask you, but they, they, they probably they had some knowledge that-... a little bit of danger for this man sleeping here. Hm. But from then on, I managed to go through, uh, the study. How did you come into the German army? Yeah, this, this was '36, '35. So three years on my, uh, uh, university time, they tried to get me to the (German). Mm-hmm. (Derman), which I, of course, with all means tried to evade. This I didn't want, not losing time. Mm-hmm. Not losing time. So, (German). You see, then what happened, they wrote (German). This we were never seen on the war pass. Hm. And they crossed it out later. So I went through all the war with this thing. Nicht Arion. With Nicht Arion, but crossed out. Did people know in the, in the military that you were a- Yes. ... quote unquote, "Half-Jew?" My unit, they know that. When I was a patrol with everyone. Yeah. (laughs) So I did not go to the (German). Hmm. On- Because of your Nicht Arion pass? Yes. (laughs) See page 10. But then, in '30... Just four months before September '39, before the war started, (German). Hmm. That means- Did you try to get back into the army? No, no, they automatically became, uh, even that I didn't want because I finished my study. I would like to have my diploma. Mm-hmm. It was more important for o- For the whole generation, we knew the war will come in '39, or something like a war, something needless. Mm-hmm. Nobody knows what will happen. Mm-hmm. All against Germany or Hitler. Otherwise, we, Germany, against all the world. Mm-hmm. And the Jews. So I was lucky to get this, so I could go on with my study this year. Mm-hmm. You see, in '39. You can read it? Yeah. (German). And then with the first day of the war, they got me. Here, you see, '35. Mm-hmm. (Dermot speaking German) This was also, this was already, this was all in '39, just before the war. Mm-hmm. And then they said, well, (German). Mm-hmm. In 1940, I was already a soldier. It started with me being a soldier, (German), 12th September '39. Mm-hmm. 19... (German) was a soldier. Yeah, did you have fear? Uh, I mean, did you fear that other people would find out about your Jewish past in the military? Sorry, I didn't get... Were you scared, were you scared that other people in the military would find out about your Jewish past? Yeah. As long... And the moment when I was a soldier and the war started, ah, the whole family said, "Now, he's a soldier. Nothing will happen to him." Mm-hmm. I... So they were scared before you were a soldier- Sure. ... something would happen. Scared, no, no, I, I think we learned in this years until '39 how to get along. Mm-hmm. Our good friends had stayed, uh, half a year in Norway with Norwegian friends. And I, I thought, "I will make it." Mm-hmm. But in the meantime, there was a drawback with the uncle. In '38, they, uh- Was that uncle here? Yeah, the uncle here. Oh, that's, that's England? They said, "He is not allowed anymore." And then my Norwegian friend tried to help him because he was born in England, but the English consulate, they were so foolish. They didn't allow him to go. But today, you will take $1000. But $1000 in pre-war times, you, the thing would look differently. If somebody would like, um, live today in Germany and would end in such a fan- fantastic, queer situation, you would pay and you would bribe. And (laughs) we, we, nobody thought of bribing in pre-war time. Hm. Only the very clever, rich Jewish people, they knew how to do it. Mm-hmm. And the others went to Auschwitz. Huh. The big bankers here in Hamburg, all of them Jewish bankers like Barbush, they're still here. Hm. So when you came into the military, what, uh, what kind- I came to the mili- ... of a company were you in? Yeah, artillery. Okay. Yeah. I have here a picture of this during the war. Here, you see me with my horse. If that's me here. This is just before Moscow. That's a fantastic picture. (laughs) I was with the mounted units. Huh. And, uh, so in Poland, you were in Poland, when did you start? In Poland, yeah, we were... We did not participate in the Poland, but, uh, after the war, after finishing Poland, we were in the, on the west, on the West Wall. Mm-hmm. (clicks tongue) This was half, uh, what we call half a professional company, half of them were drawn. Mm-hmm. So they, we were not come good enough to say to fight in Poland. Uh-huh. So they were, we, on the West Wall mostly. Mm-hmm. But then we, we went to the, to the Russian-German border by Lublin, Poland on the river Doonan. That's when the Russians moved to the Hitler, uh, uh, the Ribbentrop-Stalin-Hitler Treaty, uh, uh, allowed the Russians to move into Poland. Mm-hmm. And we were just on this border as...... sort of a watching unit. There were the Russians, there were the Germans. Mm-hmm. So I've seen Poland after the war, just as an occupation. Mm-hmm. Troops. This is written in the letter. And then we saw the first time what was going on, this being the, uh, the surrounding of Lublin, Kolno, absolutely Jewish cities. I had never seen that, you know. Probably because they were all killed. All had what? All had- Had all the star. They had all the star. Yeah. How did you feel when you saw this? Oh, shocked. Everybody was shocked. Maybe out of a company with 100 people, there were a lot of SR and SS people. Maybe they are not shocked. But seeing that, everybody was shocked. Now, did you have, did you, uh, were you scared that possibly that could happen to you? No. I was sure. (laughs) No, no, no, no. It's hard to explain. Were you- I felt absolutely safe. Were you, uh, proud to be a soldier? Proud is not the right word. I thought to myself, "I was born in war." And, uh, if I am a German, if there is some danger for this country, I'm born in Germany, everybody has to be a soldier to shelter, to cover the danger, or to fight against the danger. So I was a soldier. Was your father a soldier as well? No, but he thought the same. Mm-hmm. He would say, "I am a German," but he wasn't a soldier. My uncle was a soldier. Huh. So this was, uh... But it... Your only question is, is correct. The split meaning, the, the, uh, the situation when you live, uh, seeing how, what happened in Poland, to see all the Jewish, uh, uh, villages and towns all moved out and couldn't, nothing to eat. And uh- When did you know about the Holocaust? After the war. Did you know about your uncle's deportation? Yes, sure. Theresienstadt, we got, we got a lot of... Some letters from him. Did you know that he died in Auschwitz back then? No. But we got suddenly, suddenly... We didn't know the name Auschwitz. Mm-hmm. But we got a letter. This, uh, this all written from Russia to my mother, telling the officer at our group that something happened to, to my family. The brother of my father, he was in Theresienstadt. So I had some good friends with the, in the company, really knowing about my situation. Mm-hmm. Said, "He's not anymore there." They were, the things, taken away from Thereseinstadt. What's that? So he just disappeared in Europe? He disappeared. So you didn't know he died? No, I didn't. Well, no, even after the war, we hoped he will escape. You, you know these situations are hard to explain. Hard to explain. Hmm. So- But that doesn't help you. As I said, hard to explain. We try to explain it. Poland was the first, uh, and then we went back to the Westphalia and then very soon started the, um, um, the war in Norway. Mm-hmm. And I had good friends. Good. I really was... Even I... This was the only thing I thought, "If I had to leave Germany, I go to Norway." Mm-hmm. I had friends. I liked the country. Mm-hmm. And if I... If maybe that would hap- Maybe we had succeeded to do that. My uncle, he was not clever enough to do that. So this was my big, big, the fear. We are... We belonged to Dietl's Alpen Division. Mm-hmm. We were sent to Norway. I said, "My God, I won't be a soldier in Norway. No, no, no, no." And it happened. So we went... We were sent back some to Silesia far away. Mm-hmm. And then, uh, in 41, the Jews, uh, went. Then we went up to East Prussia to the Russian border, and we were one of the troops when they, uh, Goebbels started to go to the heights. They said, "Now we have war with the Russians." We moved into Russia. Mm-hmm. So I was in the first, first group going into Russia. Mm-hmm. So Poland was the only little experience. Never been in France. Huh. And be happy once had been in Paris. Oh, my God, that's really hard. Cleaning horses as an engineer was horror- The h- most horrible thing about the war was always living with this damn animal. I'm an engineer. You see, I'm one of the cars but I'm not with horses. (laughs) So where were you in Russia at the very beginning? Uh, where's my... Yeah, where's my... Yeah, Russia. We went in what we call Belorussia. Yeah, yeah. Belorussia. I have a, which I didn't find, I have the diary, uh, that's Kriegstagebuch. I have the Kriegstagebuch from our time. Oh, yeah. So I have it with me but I didn't find it. So you will see that. What happens? Here exactly. This here? No, it starts here. It start... No, here starts '39. Uh, (German). This was Poland. Mm-hmm. (German) was Poland. And then (German). And we go through Lithuania. Mm-hmm. Went to Lithuania, Vyazma, Smolensk, Bryansk, Moscow. I was near to Moscow. These pictures weren't far near to Moscow. And then came the winter and we went back, back, back.Hmm. So this is all here. I will make a copy of this. Yeah. You see? And you see what I... this is quite something. It ended up in '42 and '43, (German). It was always, we always were in the, what they call (German). Hmm. Most dirty and poor. Why were, why were you not, uh, in 1940, why were you not, uh, discharged? Because you- In '43? No, in '40. In... no, I tell you because I had good friends or I was a good soldier, maybe. Huh. Maybe. You see, you see what I got? So how many years were you in Russia? '41 to '43. And what happened after '43? '43, I was here. I was dismissed. Yeah. You were discharged? Yeah. (German). This was (German). I was (German) 10th of May '43. Why? Why? Why? This is fantastic. Nobody know what... I even, (German). They were really nice to write, when I, a lot of control. They were traveling in, after I was thrown out of the army, so I had my (German), but nobody knows what that means, you know? But the Wannsee Conference, this was the... if you read the book from Kruger, there, I told you. There is something, also it's very rare. The colonel treated, he had actually lived actually, and he called me by first name, Otto Schlesinger. Your officer did? No, my, my, my big boss in the, during the war. Oh, okay. Yeah, your officer. Your- My officer, yeah. So you dudes together. Yeah, but only if he was writing. Okay. And he said, (German). This here is to write to a Jewish Mischling, you know? (laughs) And he had two of these. Did he know? Did he know you had two? Oh, sure, yeah. I knew him from pre-war times. He was the same academic ship club. He knew me very well. Huh. But when he died, who has written in all the papers and who has done the necrology? My, I've written his necrology, all his other currents, I have done that. Hmm. (laughs) So what did you do? I always belong to establishment during the war. (laughs) So what did you do after your (German)? Ah, that was tricky. I went back to... You know what happened? I was so proud in a way, said, "Well, they couldn't get me. I know there's something wrong." But I go back to the university because my diploma was not finished. Uh-huh. Let's see when I finished. I must see this. 1944? Yeah, let me see. '44, yeah. Yes, '44. (laughs) Finished. So you went back and you studied? I went back to university, but this was tricky. Uh-huh. This I knew three year... in '18? No. In 1918, I learned to know from a, uh, little research study why, uh, why I, uh, (German) why I could go get the, um, the permits to finish my study. Most of people didn't get that, but I got it. (laughs) I got it. And then did you have the yellow outset? No, no. They, they, that changed absolu- they, they- So you hid your- Normal, normal. ... Jewish pass? Normal, no, normal. So you, did you lie about your past when they asked you about your Aryan past? Yeah, or your ethnic Aryan past? Did you lie or- No, no. ... did you get false papers or how did you do it? No, wait a minute, I can show you. Wait. Where's... Got me that, that file. Is that yours or mine? No, this is yours. Which one? The file? Which one? This? You see, we are still meeting the old unit. (laughs) (laughs) Isn't that nice? And does the unit know that you're half Jewish? For sure. Well, they knew but didn't... nobody was interested in that. No, nobody was. So it was never a problem? No. Huh. For others it had been a problem, not for me. So where's the other one? Let me get that. This is most important. This man, Dr. Huk, he has written a research (clears throat) on Jews and Mischlingen on the technical university. Uh-huh. This you should know. (German) And then director, a top Nazi- Uh-huh. ... Weigel, he had sent three letters to the Reichsminister für Wissenschaft that this man Schlesinger immediately should be... This I didn't know. Just after the war, this, this, uh, historian from the university had shown me that. I didn't know anything about that. Uh-huh. You see? So I asked to be com- explaining, uh, why family member because that's everything. So I was quite open in '43. But I said- That you were F2? You, you told them that? But I told him I was in war. I had the Eisenkreuz and, and, and, and... Uh-huh. And then this man, (German), February '44. July, he was pressing the ministry. (laughs) (German)... und, und, und, und, und. (german) This man, this Weigel, he looked like 10 years, you know- (laughs) ... black and dark, and he was a top Nazi. But apparently in '43, he was thinking maybe it wa- it went wrong. Then again, (German). (German) I was still... I was just completing my... I didn't care if I got the end, uh, the, um, (German). I just worked and made my, my big, uh, doctor examination. (laughs) I just didn't care because I came back there, "What can happen to me? I've been in Russia. I've done this, this, this." So, ah, "What happened to me?" Different what the, the, um, what the Kruger, you know, was OT. Actually, I was really... I was this way, "Ha, ha, ha." Me? "Ha, ha," no. Nix. Me? No, nothing. Really, I was absolute blue-eyed. What do you call it in German? Light-sinning? Uh, you, you were not able to see it. Huh? You were not, you didn't want to... You were not able to see it. Uh, light-sinning. I, I, I'm trying. I couldn't find the word. Blue eyes in a way, you know. (laughs) It's up that way. So, I... then in, uh, I got a job with the, uh, Farbecher Hoost where I made my diploma. Mm-hmm. And then now, again, uh, just before the end of war, the invasion was in Normandy and I was working there. What could happen? Then, then with a sudden, I got the invitation from I said to my boss, "Professor Halle, I made this big..." This was a Oh my God. And what we do? Well, I says, "I go look what is going on." And I saw It was like, um, like when I- Where, where were you? In Frankfurt. Okay. Frankfurt Hoost. In IG Farbenindustrie. They were maybe, they were probably where there are a lot of other Mischling which have never seen one before, you know. That's one of the thing I'm telling you later. I said, "No, they, they won't care." Huh. I, my big rescue by I had three girlfriends. If I got this letter OT, I gave up the one, uh- You had three girlfriends during the same time? ... in Frankfurt. I went a lot in... Lived in Berlin. I stayed four weeks in and then let's see where the mail... What happened with the mail. OT wouldn't find me. So then I went back to Frankfurt. In Frankfurt, there was Ria, another girl, so I stayed there. (laughs) I had three girls. And they really helped me through as, when it became a little bit difficult, I told Professor Halle, "I better... Let me... Send me on a business tour to Berlin or I go on my own." Mm-hmm. "Ah, you'll go." Imagine. I was this really... Yeah. (sighs) I wouldn't say this was sort of braveness or the tougher kind. It was, um, the will to survive. I have not much experience with life. No, no. Mm-hmm. But how to explain? I made... Either I was good luck- Mm-hmm. ... and I mi- I made the optimum what you could do in my position. This book from Kruger, that's the first time of my life to compare what other have done. But he was, he, he was in a much more different position than I. Have you read that book? Mm-hmm. My mother survived. What happened to your father? My, my father died in '40, 1940. Did he have problems because he was Jewish? Well- Could you- I told you. I went to the hospital. Mm-hmm. And then, sure, I had a problem. When I had to go to the, uh, in Cologne, where the hospital I, where I had to go to call at the community and say my father died. I came in in uniform and the SR people who were (german) He couldn't understand. "Your father died in the Jewish hospital?" "Yeah, well, my father's died there. I have to go back to my, my, my company to make fresh." (laughs) (laughs) I never forget that. That man seeing me in uniform- Mm-hmm. ... saying my father. He had to tell him, "You don't... P- please do not write Paul Israel Schlesinger." "I have to do that, Herr Schlesinger." "You know, the Jews should think..." I said, "I, I don't want this, but then done." Ha. Huh. So. So, how did you end the war? Where were you? By way of your doctor- In Farbecher Hoost. Yeah, I had done this, this big doctor work. I was there. And I tried always not to get to the But four weeks before, then Hitler told all the big plants like IG Farbenindustrie, "When the Americans will come, you will, uh, follow up You know what it means? Yeah. You have to disturb the plant. Burn it, yeah. And Professor Halle, a good friend of mine, the boss where I made my diploma, he said, "Oh, Schlesinger, we, we will never do that." And then Frankfurt was heavily destroyed and heavily bombed.... and then with sudden, the OT went apparently to the Gestapo- Mm-hmm. ... and told the, uh, the managing director of, uh, IG Farben people, Professor Holler, "This mensch Leisinger, he has to go to the Gestapo office in, uh, Frankfurt. We want to see him." I don't know the exact, uh, words, but he told me, "Hmm, what can we do?" He says, "This is risky. This, hmm, yeah. So this is where the Americans are on the line and then they, they... Ooh." I was, "What to do?" And he said, "Well, I try. I telephone here, telephone there because he is on a kriegswichtige Arbeit." I mean, "You have to bring that letter." So this was the first time we were really anxious. I had to bring this letter from Professor Holler to... because it was under time pressure. Mm-hmm. Excuse me. Oh, switch it off? No, no, no, keep on going. Just... Um, under time pressure? Yeah, that's what I fear. The... (camera rustling) The, um, as I said, I was lucky with this. Let's just, just to make a little step aside, this was one of... That was a nice-looking girl. Yes. You see here, the iron, ironed clutches on it. This one I was showing of the army, so, uh, I was... This is the one girl I liked much. Mm-hmm. There was another one. (laughs) Here was another one. These are all in, within three months I changed them. She lived in Berlin. Oh, so not the same time? No. (laughs) I don't know. So, and this was another one, this was another one. This was la- just last days in Frankfurt. Hmm. Before the war was over? The just, just the last week before the American troops entered in, so I saw the end of the war in Frankfurt. Just to- So you are... The first American soldier, he came to see. He found somewhere looting a box of cigars. And he came to me, he said, "Want a cigar?" This was the first soldier, American soldier who came to me with a box of cigars, said, "Want a cigar?" (laughs) (laughs) This was the end of the war. "Want a cigar?" So what, uh, what do you think... From your experience from World War II, what have you learned from that? From what? From your experience in World War II. What would you say you've learned? Uh, I, I didn't get the point. (Was haben Sie aus dem Zweiten Weltkrieg gelernt?) Yeah, I mean, uh, I follow 100%. Oh, okay. Uh, yeah, the, from your experience. Sort of a summary. A les- a lesson. Did you learn any important lessons that you applied to the rest of your life? Oh. (exhales) The lesson? (laughs) The lesson, uh, there was one positive side, that I sur- had survived. Mm-hmm. It was a matter of sheer luck, but also certain self-assurance and the feeling I went through hard time, uh, during the war, they won't get me. And this, uh, was right. This, I have done that, uh, in a sort of an optimal way how to survive. Mm-hmm. That's, I think... But the other lesson was, what, um, what are you after? Did you think, uh, in '33 or '35, the family, um, had said, "Now we'll leave, we'll go out of Germany." We had never had the idea. My father was too old. Mm-hmm. My uncle tried it in '38. And I had in mind, if there was no war and I could finish my diploma engineer, I would have gone to Norway. But that's still not a lesson. (sighs) What do you mean what a lesson? Any way you want to interpret it. (laughs) Should we come back to this question and I'll ask you... Huh? Should we come back to this question and I'll ask you again... No, no, no, I'm still thinking, well, how to explain because it's very important. Mm-hmm. I, uh, do we frankly... Of course, I'm frank. (laughs) Um, uh, um, like Kruger in his book, when the war was over, I said to myself, "Forget all about it. It's a shame what happened that we couldn't, could not help my uncle." My uncle, I was... he was nearly, nearer to me and my father. We, we liked each other very much. Uh, why... The lesson was, why couldn't we help him? Because I was a soldier. But others helped their family. This is one thing I've the lesson, uh, we or the family or I as a soldier had tried to help in a better way. There's one lesson... (audio cuts out)