[HEBREW TRANSLATION] ... uh, uh, limited to the few patients who wanted an old doctor. Mm-hmm. And those were recommended to me and any practice, you know? Mm-hmm. Despite a few months in the medical experience was, was very, very one-sided, one-sided thing. Mm-hmm. I didn't learn anything. I didn't know anything. I was led through my, my, my feelings, my intuitive position. Mm-hmm. But, uh, I earned a little bit money and didn't much damage in those times. Now in 1934, '35, especially after the Nuremberg Laws, you had, you, you had become a doctor. After the- I became a doctor 1970, uh, '37, a few months before Austria was extinguished. So what were you thinking, uh, in 1935 when the Nuremberg Laws came out? I had to, uh, twice as much as before. To, to win this race, as you call it. That's it. Yeah. So in 1936 when Germany invaded the Rhineland, at this particular time, were the people in Austria, as well as yourself, convinced that Hitler was a real power and that he was not just a party that was going to fade out? Most of them were looking forward very much to live there, to see those two- Oh, the, north Austrians wanted to be a part of Germany? Yes. No, they, they didn't, uh, they didn't expect that. That, uh, they only had dreams. I don't know, but they didn't, didn't expect Austria to be extinguished. They thought that it would remain a country with a, uh, government like in Germany with, with, uh, this, uh, y- idealistic people or peoples. (laughs) Nazi influence. Yes, of course. Now, and- If the Jews, uh, read the, uh, papers in every day was when Hitler will not survive because the last time in, uh, the 10th, he will not survive- In 1936? 1936. Yeah, 1936. It is very, very difficult. So when they successfully, when Germany successfully reoccupied the Rhineland- Yes. ... what, uh, what, what did you think and what were Austrians in Vienna, you know, Vienna meaning Vienna at this time? Because to me, it was logical. Logic. It was logical. It was logic. Oh, logic. Mm-hmm. It was logic. Mm-hmm. He wanted to, uh, he wanted to, uh, uh, he wanted to realize his ideas, come to power, and augment the power, and to overpower as much as he can. Mm-hmm. And so came the Jews. Now in 1938- Yes. ... when he, uh, marched into Austria- Yes. ... you were a doctor. Yes. Uh, were you terrified that Austria became a part of Germany, and what were you thinking of this, this year? Of course. Uh, I thought now I've saved of, of my life over a question of time. Did you try to escape? Did your family try to escape at this time? My family escaped. Mm-hmm. They, they switched out my mother, helped them to... It was, was very difficult to, uh, come to Paris. Mm-hmm. Not for a long time. Mm-hmm. Um, it's interesting. She was American. And I wonder now, but first time ago, they didn't try to come, to go to America altogether. Her sister, her children. But she was very fond of Paris, a true French girl. And my uncle wasn't in United States. He was, he was boss of Europe of the RKO Pictures. It was a career from washing dishes, then peoples. At a restaurant or- This- What was his job? Boss of Europe of the RKO Pictures, who made these films with Ginger Rogers and Fred Astaire. Oh. And King Kong. Mm-hmm. They were on the, on the top of the, of the, uh... And what was his name? Um, Leising, Harry Leising. Harry Leising. He died very early. He, he escaped from Russia too. Mm-hmm. And, uh, joined the American army as soon as possible, always made the services and became colonel. Colonel. Mm-hmm. Then he, when the, when, uh, when the war began, he, uh, he became officer in the army. He, he kept his, uh, the cinema job. Mm-hmm. But half a year later, he, he died from a stroke. Huh. Not even aged 50 years. Yeah. Now when did you go into the army and why did you go into the army? Uh, you can imagine I was, I was, uh, just, I just became doctor. I just, uh, joined a few months, uh, university period. So I want to have some experience. Mm-hmm. And, but before my... Hitler was, I think, uh, two months or one month in Austria when I got from the army paper, "You have to join the army."... so I had the time to consider my, my immigra- immigration because even before my- otherwise, I couldn't have immigrated with my parents. But before they left, before they had, uh, in, uh, France, um, um, they had in France- Immigration laws and- ... all those difficulties, uh, uh, uh, wrote behind in search. Mm-hmm. I was... I tried to escape but, uh, I think four or five times I, I said, "Because I'm not Jewish, I, I s- it must be an error." (laughs) It was. And so it, it went four or five times. I had always to go immediately, because I, I protested. Did you tell the Wehrmacht that you were half-Jewish? Hmm? Did you tell the army that you were half-Jewish and why you didn't want to go in? They knew, certainly. They knew? Yes, certainly. Then why do you think they recruited you? Hmm? Why did they recruit you if they knew you were half-Jewish? Because, uh, when I protested against my, um, against the, against- The order? ... against the order, they immediate, yes, immediately answered. So they must have known. Otherwise, they wouldn't have said to, to, uh, ask other people or ask whether I can prove this. They knew, of course. So you openly told them about your background- Of course, I was a Jewish escapee. All right. Now, what was your training like? Did they... Or, uh, obviously, they did not believe you or they ignored it and accepted you into the army, or they may have forced you into the army, correct? Yes. So what was your training like? What were you doing? Uh, as I, well, hadn't been in the army, I was the last one who had been... Austria installed an army, too, but my age, my year of age wasn't, wasn't, uh, on the program. So I... Only the younger ones were taken to the Austrian army. So I had no military education at all. Mm-hmm. And I was put to the infantry. Uh, there was Deutschmeister, the famous number three, number four regiment. Mm-hmm. At the infantry. Of course, we, I was 24 with only 17 or 18 years old recruits, uh, uh, beginners. Mm-hmm. And, uh, all this, uh, uh, most of the, our educators were very young, too, much younger than I and from Germany mostly. Oh, so the military- Of course, yeah. Huh. Now, what was the training like there? It was extremely hard. Mm-hmm. Extremely hard. What did they make you do? Hmm? What did they make you do? What was a daily activity? What, what every army does with every (laughs), with every man in the army. Mm-hmm. So that's they, they had to, uh, with their arms and execution and- Mm-hmm. ... they had to run and still, and, uh, education in machine gun and all the- Mm-hmm. ... these things and, and exercise and exercise and- Mm-hmm. ... and always cry out loud and, and, and, uh, shift the- Ah. ... um, leg up- Leg. Yeah. Yeah. Play basketball with you and stuff? Yes, yes, to everybody. I was no exception. Now, did you- As I said, for, for example, there were, in the, in the, um, court of the barracks, uh, were some young trees. Mm-hmm. And if they were, uh, angry then, they were always angry. (laughs) They said that, "Up the trees, you Austrian pigs!" (laughs) Huh. Now, did- That doesn't exist, but in, uh, for the very reason (laughs) we were, you know, Austrian pigs. Now- You name it, you know. Do you think, uh, the basically just the bend over, the connection with Austria and Germany, do you think because Hitler was Austrian, it was easier for Austria to accept the Anschluss? This has nothing to do with it. Nothing to do with it? It was the ideology which was affected- Hmm. ... long before Hitler invaded. So it was the nationalism? There was, there was an extremely high percentage of, uh, uh, people without, unem- uh, without employment. Mm-hmm. Of course, Hitler did it. (laughs) (laughs) And because it's of the, as a result, it was an e- an extremely high- Mm-hmm. ... unemployment. They longed for, uh, for, for change of life. They wanted to w- work. Hmm. Now, when you were training and there was a whole bunch, you were training with a whole bunch of Austrians, did they consider themselves and did you consider yourselves and after the Anschluss as German? Did people talk about, "I'm a German." You say, "Ich bin Deutsche." I never considered myself to be a German. I am not- What about your friends? ... not a drop of German blood in mine, (laughs) in my body. Not a single drop. Now, wait a second. It was Jewish or Or- and Russian. (laughs) However, it was in Austria. That's, that's normal in Austria. What about the other Austrians? Did they consider themselves German? Did they consider themselves Austrian? A big, a big, I wouldn't say majority, but a big part of Austrians were deeply disappointed-... to be not any longer of them, but to be just an appendix of Germany. So, they're leaving because their, their history of 1000 years was extinguished at once. Why didn't they try to fight it? Because they were scared of Germany. Why didn't they- Why didn't these people try to fight the Anschlag? Why did they- Why, um- Because he was (whispering). The Austrian government tried to, uh, install something like the... The Austrians politics, politicians handled extremely stupid in those days. It would have required every man willing to defend Austria to cooperate with each other and instead, uh, left, uh, right wing, uh, and the left wing and, and all this where all one against the other. And then came Dollfuss with his copy of Hitler. Mm-hmm. And that was it. They took over government. His only hope was Mussolini would help Austria. Mm-hmm. And after, uh, Hitler and Dollf- Mussolini had done the, the, the deal, Austria was gone. Uh- So we had, in fact, nothing to do in that. We were a board with which Mussolini, Hitler and the French and the... played. But we had nothing to... nothing. (laughs) We, we were not... We are... We are peasants. Okay. Now during your training- Yeah. ... the Austrians you were training with and obviously your superiors, were you or the Austrians you were training with proud to be in the Wehrmacht? Were they proud to be in this new military organization? I? You, or these other Austrians? Nobody ever has been proud of being in the army because your will is broken within a few weeks and then, then you are still le- then you are still, uh, you are, you are, you're broken. Your personality is, by intention, broken as in every army. Mm. You are not proud. You are nothing. You are only help- uh, hoping that you will, uh, not, uh, not, uh, get a job with, uh, a better job, not a worse job and, and just a, a little bit, uh, the, um, uh, it had something to do with survival, with surviving. Hmm. If the war began and we got real ammunition. Mm-hmm. It was not the right ammunition we had been before, except when we had to shoot on things. Mm. The moment we have ammunition, then, uh, the mood of the ser- uh- Sergeant. Sergeants and officers changed immediately. They slacken us because some, many had, had said, "If I get one, uh, uh, uh, a sharp ammunition, the first victim will be them." (laughs) Right. Certainly the better people. And they knew exactly because it's in every army the same. When, when... Just a real quick question to ask you about the future. When war did come, did any of these common defrieters and, and, uh, uh, open defrieters, did they actually shoot their officers? No. All right. They didn't do that? Every, every, the same in every army. (laughs) Okay. Now, how- Certainly, maybe some... It may, may have been happened sometimes. But in fact in our... As far as I know, but I didn't join... I was, I was transferred to another group to do mostly recruiting, doing the recruitment. But, uh, uh, the aggression then is transformed from the officers to the enemy. Ah. Oh, definitely. The, the neck is broken. The, the vertebrae broken and the aggre- aggressive, aggression is directed against the enemy. Okay. So that's how it works. And during your training, were you thinking this was strange? Here I am, I'm a half-Jew and I'm in the Nazi Army. Did you think this was comical or were you just- No, it wasn't comical at all because when I went to the army, I spoke to my captain on the first day and I said, "I'm not here because I'm, I'm a, a, a convinced, uh, nationalist and, and, and German. I'm here because I have to be here, and please, uh, keep from me away unnecessary, uh, unnecessarily actions." And what did he say to you? It was completely unexpected. He was in Hamburg, from Hamburg. And he said to me, "Brown, uh, it would be best for you if war comes. In the moment war has come and you are wearing, wearing the uniform of Hitler, you will be automatically 100% German accepted."... I, I think he believed that himself. And I, in fact, didn't believe it. Really? But it made me uncertain. How uncertain about what? That I could survive. Hmm. That perhaps he would make some difference between Jews by religion and Jews by parents and grandparents, like my father- Mm-hmm. ... and myself. At this particular time, did you find yourself wishing that you did not have a Jewish father, that you were 100%, quote-unquote, "Austrian" or Aryan? I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I, I had such ideas. It was, it was very- Mm-hmm. You could understand it. But, uh, uh, as many tried to, uh, get rid of the Jewish of these documents. Mm-hmm. And I remember an extremely Jewish-looking colleague. Mm-hmm. I, I really was convinced he was a Jew and he must have been one by name and by face and- Mm-hmm. ... a fine, a fine boy, by the way. And, uh, he said, after he graduated, to, to me, "I, I'm sorry for the half-Jews, the poorest ones." And I- Mm-hmm. ... I was really, I was really astonished because I didn't... He didn't know obviously that, that I was half a Jew. But I, I, I thought he was, uh, 100% Jew. Mm-hmm. But as I learned later on, all his four grandparents had been Christians. Mm-hmm. So he was 100% Jew and 100% alive at the same time. What happened to him? Which? What happened to him in the war? He, um, uh, he became doctor and he was a doctor like me. He was a political man. He, um, um, survived Stalingrad. He was in the Wehrmacht? Of course. He was completely a rebel. But all four grandparents were Jewish? Christians. Mm-hmm. With their all four Christian at birth they posted. They posted by military professor. He was... And obviously this Hitler had manipulated- The document. No. What was his name? Uh, I'm not... He's, he's alive. Oh, yeah? Mm-hmm. Yeah. And, uh, he had, um... He was... came back very, very, very sick to death. Sick to death. After Stalingrad? After Stalingrad? Yes. Uh, yes. Yes. He from... He survived and came back very, very sick from an infected disease. I, I, I don't want to, to name it, too... not to make it clear whom I mean. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. And he survived. Mm-hmm. And I, I, I don't know who had the better fate. This one who had manipulated his- Mm-hmm. ... four grandparents. Obviously, he was not the only one. Mm-hmm. In this way, being Jewish helped him down in this way. I'm, I'm... I don't know. I can't, I can't prove it, but I deeply believe it. Now, at this, this is the time, would you like to take a break or are you feeling okay? Would you like to continue on or- No, no. Let's, let's continue. Okay. And so how long was your training? My training was one year, year. One year. It, it starts with, uh, with a, with a maneuver. Mm-hmm. And I, I had to go, uh, in three days, 150 kilometers- Mm-hmm. ... with a machine gun. Mm-hmm. And, uh, I think, uh, only 20% of the regiment were injured. How many, how many people? How many men? Uh, a company is about 120- 20. ... and a regiment is about 800. Mm-hmm. So- Mm-hmm. ... I think, uh, only 20% were able to full... uh, to come to an end to this. And you were one of 20? I was one of the, one of these 20. And then after the first day, I went in the, uh, um, fruit trees to get some fruit. (laughs) (laughs) But I, I did much more. Mm-hmm. That's what I did. Mm-hmm. Did you participate in the, um- And I was... There were enough... Uh, uh, he, uh... There was... In, in addition to that, there was a garden company. Garden company. Um, I don't know if you think so. Hm. Okay. Guard. Guard. If there were funeral or something- Mm-hmm. ... and as I was one of the greatest of our group- Mm-hmm. ... I had to be in the, uh, Saturday and Sunday, I had to train with this guard for ex- uh, for, for funerals and, and, uh, special occasions. With that I had to do. Mm-hmm. And I think altogether, it must have been good for my health, for my mind. Hmm. So you were in good shape? After, after that extremely hard five years of studying, studying, studying, studying- Mm-hmm. ... I... It was no studying. No, no, because my... I was decerebrated- Mm-hmm. ... too, by the-... traumatic, uh, exhaustion and efforts. Mm-hmm. Understand? It's not that comp- competitive to touch the line. Hmm. Now after, um, this one year of training, how did you feel after one year of being in the army in, of actually being a soldier? What was your feeling? Did it change any at all from the very beginning because you were terrified at first? Were you still terrified? No. No. No. You thought there might be a chance that you could survive by doing this? Only because of there was, uh, you know, the one chance was the idea of my captain. Mm-hmm. The other was perhaps if I were in a better physical condition could put completely different. Hmm. And I survived. Now, did you participate in the, uh, reoccupation of the Sudetenland? Of course. So you, what did you think about that when you invaded along with a whole bunch of other Germans into Sudetenland? (static) And what was your opinion on it? I, I, there had been no fight. We just moved. We had after the first act of Hitler- Mm-hmm. ... we moved from Hamburg because between Czech- Czechoslovakian order- border and Vienna. Mm-hmm. Uh, we moved and we recrossed the border. The Czechoslovakian re- retreated. Retreated. Re- retreated. And we just, uh, occu- uh, occupied their barracks. I didn't, there was no- nothing there. And then the second act, we just had to do, uh, go, uh, the next day march is the river which separates Czechoslovakia from Austria. Mm-hmm. We just to get, to get, uh, something like that, to help the other invading troops- Mm-hmm. ... so that nobody could escape. Come back. Mm-hmm. Escape. So, uh, I, I didn't, uh, no fight. Only, only, only we had those horses. No, no cars. They're only infantry or, or everything by foot. Now, at this stage, did you know war was going to happen soon? People convinced from the beginning that war was going to happen. From the beginning. What were your comrades and Europeans, were men scared about what was happening in Germany? This wa- were farmer's sons of 17 and 18. They were only interested in having some beer on Saturday and locally people. And I, I was very well, uh, I, I didn't, uh, I didn't dare to sh- to speak. Hm. E- everywhere, everywhere, no. I didn't believe in becoming a real German by then, but I still was alive and, and I couldn't move. I couldn't do. Mm-hmm. I, as I came to the army, I said to me, "Here I am. Do what you like." I didn't, I ga- gave no, no, I didn't, uh, I wasn't aggressive at all. I was completely passive. And I told you when I later on, uh, met, uh, one of the educators in Vienna, they, they wondered, still wonder that I hadn't had, uh, more stupid behavior than the most stupid farmer so, because if I had to lay down, if there was a, a water at the bottom, each farmer would have done one step in, in advance to, to lay down out of the water. Out of the water. But I placed myself in, in the middle of the, as he had wanted to. Mm-hmm. And he, when he told me he had wondered that I did that, I, I, I didn't say anything. Uh, I wondered, "Oh, did I do? Oh, I can't remember." But I knew exactly that it, it was, uh, he wanted me to do the same as the other farmers because I was a doctor. Mm-hmm. Not because I was, was racial difference, but because I- I was a doctor. Mm-hmm. Just to, to get wet six or seven times in the, in the Seine. So that, uh, that was my strategy. So, were you frustrated? You just described a little bit of a conflict of intellect, you know, with your officer and you, he wanted you to lay down in the water in front of him because you were a doctor. Were you frustrated, um, during this time because you had had so much education, and did you feel that you were more intelligent than a lot of your officers? Did you understand my question? Do you want me to... No. ... or how did you say it? Not at all. There was no problem. No problem? Big differences in their, their, my function was not in the army. My function was in, in medicine. Mm-hmm. So these are other people with other functions, with other, uh, uh, personal, physical, and psychological, uh, uh, equipment. So it was- Mm-hmm. ... it was okay. Okay. So what did you do when, um, Germany took over the rest of Czechoslovakia, invaded Prague, and you know what I mean? I went along the march (laughs) with my group. Uh-huh. I don't know how far away, just to, to, uh, uh, to, uh, to hit them.... to- The fort? No, no. In the country. Just to- To make sure that more of them happened? To make sure that no, uh, forces of Czechoslovakia invaded Austria. Ah, okay. We were just at the, uh- The border? ... just at the border. Oh, okay (crosstalk). But nothing happened and then we went either to our direction former Czechoslovakia. And what did you think at the time you heard about Czechoslovakia and you're like this is, this is what happens? To me, after invasion of Austria, uh, of German, in- Mm-hmm. ... in front of France, it was normal. You know- Could, it was what you wanted to. It was only for me, it was only the question, how long will France with England and Soviet Union and United States, how long will they look at this? Their steady augmentation of power and land. Mm-hmm. When will they capitulate or when they once, uh, helped to those victims. Mm-hmm. So I was always dictator. Now during this time, did you develop any close friendships with any of your fellow soldiers? No. You kept to yourself? I was one of the old... You see, um, farmer's boys were 70 and 80. They usually, they naturally stick together. So they were... I was, I was not part of the population. Hmm. I wasn't. I was adopted. Don't speak English. What division were you in? Please? What division were you in? Division? 44th Division in Fort Siedler, Austria. Now, when the war, uh, began with Poland- Yes. ... September of, uh, 1939. Where were you and what was your job and what were you doing? I was, a few days, uh, uh, before beginning of the war, I was, uh, called to my captain and he gave me an envelope with a, a lot of papers inside and said I had to, to, uh, go to the medical unit of the division. Mm-hmm. The medical (German) of the 44th Division. Mm-hmm. Which is being, uh, uh, installed at a small place in lower Austria. Mm-hmm. I said, "Well..." Oh, excuse me. (laughs) (laughs) I said, "Well," and I went to Vienna. I had no flat, no whatever, but a friend of my mother's, I had a little, little, uh, little trunk or a koffer? Yeah, well, chest. suitcase. Suitcase. And that, that was all I had. I, I had nothing that, I, I was really very, very poor. I had only a, uh, one or two pair of shoes. Mm-hmm. And one, one shirt and one- Hat. Mm-hmm. That was all. And I had my, my study books. Mm-hmm. From medicine. I opened my suitcase. Suitcase. Mm-hmm. I opened my suitcase and took out the surgery script and closed it. (laughs) And went to the unit. But the unit didn't exist, uh, in that, uh, the, the plan must, must have been outdated. Mm-hmm. So I, I came to the next unit which was a cavalry unit. Mm-hmm. And they immediately, uh- Grabbed you? ... grabbed me. And, and then in the very night, night, I, uh, went by railway- Okay. ... to the Polish border with a lot of horses, a lot of, of cars and a lot of ammunition- Mm-hmm. ... for the artillery. And he, uh, waited. Yeah. Hold on one second. You were taken, you marched to the Polish border. Yes. And what happened then? And you were in the- I was declared to be cavalries and set on an horse first in my life. First horse in your life? (laughs) First horse and first, first time. And that horse was the worst of the whole, uh, group. Why do you say that? Um, they taught me how to use a horse and I used it, but it, it, it crashed with his head against the, the house. And then I- What happened? When, how did it, why did it crash against the house? Um, we got it out. It was blind. (laughs) So, eh, eh- Literally, it was blind? It still, really. A, a still farmer had to pay the Deutsche Wehrmacht by selling that horse to them. Hmm.So that I, I get, I got then the next worst post of the unit. What was wrong with his? (laughs) Uh, I think he, he was an expert in artillery. He had, with his lungs, problems with his lungs. He also had to... (laughs) (laughs) And you were the doctor that was supposed to take care of all these men? I was the doctor who should this... because it's a big unit. They came from all parts of lower Austria in that region and, uh, there were seven groups, seven cavalry groups. And they had to have a doctor, but they had no, no doctor. Hmm. As it's... as I told you before, it was, uh, that they wanted many doctors at once because of the Jewish doctors who had to em- emigrate and they are not accepted in the army. Mm-hmm. In this way, they were very, very want of doctors in such units. Now, were you still with the 44th Division? For the... That was, uh, the artillery de facto staff for all the... 44th Division? 44th Division. We were immediately under the head, under the division staff and had to transport in the night ammunition to the artillery, uh, to the artillery, according to their, uh, what they wanted to have. Mm-hmm. So it was, uh, if they had really more, uh, done against it, I should, um, have said sorry, but it, it would be a, a very dangerous thing to do because we'd have had n- great losses certainly because they acted partly with horses, uh, units, too. And, and of course, uh, uh, we were... if they were good hidden- Mm-hmm. ... they could, uh, could do very much against this, especially this, uh, these troops. And, uh, a- and an example how vulnerable we were, the German Army, I say we, uh, the, the German Army lost, each example is, uh, my group in, in which I had been, my, uh, my company in which I had been educated. Mm-hmm. They shortly, after, uh, the invasion because the tank divisions went straight on. Mm-hmm. But, uh, troops of Polish fighters remained in the forest. Mm-hmm. My former group was, uh, was attacked. I don't know how. They didn't expect any, any, any, uh, any, uh, resistance. Mm-hmm. But they were attacked and about every fourth was killed and, and, uh... had all, all the officers and most of the, most of the, uh, surgeons. And this was the unit that you were transferred from? You were... this was your old unit? Most probably it saved my life that I, that I was doctor. Otherwise, perhaps I had to- Mm-hmm. ... remain in the unit, but this way I went to the non-existing laceration. And so, uh, I, so I invaded Poland. What, uh, uh, what I did dislike extremely was we met many Jewish, uh, Jews who had, uh, like traditional things. And, uh, this old man, mostly from the First World War, World War, they made a fun to, uh, pull the rifles at, against them. It was just for jokes. Hmm. And what did the old man do? He raised his hands and if he, if he ha- had something in his arms, he, he dropped it and he took it, took it away from him. And what did you feel at the time? Did you- Terribly. Terribly. Yeah. It, it was, uh, too, too... That's no way of talking with human beings. Did you try to stop it? I had nothing to... I, I was, I was nothing, because, uh, they, in fact, they didn't show, uh, nobody really been shoot. It was just a joke, but they, it was terrible, really terrible. Did you see any Wehrmacht soldiers that actually shoot you? Or they just made fun? This was, this was a lot young, uh, um, fanatized. Fanatized? Fanatical. Fanatically, young man. These were old farmers who had been in the First, Old World War and without, without any training overnight were, were concentrated and- Hmm. ... and sent into the Polish. So it was, it was, it was a, a very bad joke. I was no fana- fanatic in fact. No. I- What I saw, what, what, uh, I remember, uh, what, uh, what I found, uh, I found very, very bad food worse. We had been in an, in a Polish village near the border.And we had no electric light, no electric lamps. We had electric, uh, uh... but no electric lamps. Mm-hmm. And I tried to get an electric lamp. Mm-hmm. I- I had... I was... I had no military degree, so I, I had nothing to... I couldn't order anything really, at least in the army. And I, I rang at a, at a dispensary. Mm-hmm. And an old man opened. Most of the inhabitants of the village were not anymore in the village. Mm-hmm. They were killed or went away. But he was in the, in the dispensary open, and I asked, uh, politely, "Please, could you spare an electric lamp? Do you have any house?" Mm-hmm. And he said, um, "I have only one in my room and one in the floor up here." He said. In the moment came a very young German, the Greifer, below F2, 52. The, the, the, uh, the man was a Polish man who spoke German. He was about 60 years. Then the young man, as he pushed me aside- Were you, uh, the greifer as well? Mm-hmm. No, I was never the greifer. Hmm. How old were you? I couldn't, uh... I could only, under certain circumstances, become the greifer, but normally not at all. So he pushed you aside? He pushed me aside, uh, not because, uh... He just wanted to have an electric light, and I was nothing. So, uh, he didn't even observe me (laughs). So he went to the op- uh, um, dispens- uh, how do you call it, uh, after the thing with the name? The- The bakery? Yeah, the bakery. Ah. The man, the man-