[HEBREW TRANSLATION] ... fetch the, to- Ladder. ... the ladder. Went up. Took the lamp and gave it the young man. And then went back one or two steps to his shoes. Mm-hmm. And the young man was 18, 19 years. 18, 19 years. The young man pushed after him and gave him with his big shoes in his backside and made, made, he, he, he kick, kicked so that the old man- And what did you do? I observed this to be able to tell you this. Okay. And what was... is this- My idea was if you behave against parts of the population, you are not unwilling to do what you want this way. I cannot imagine you will win the war. This was my idea. Mm-hmm. It's... I was deeply impressed by that behavior, by that behavior on the first day of war. So, did you see this all around you, that within every... uh, a lot of the soldiers- No, no. ... they became very aggressive? No, I didn't see because I was always with Michael, with, with this elder man. And he was... I, I don't know where from he was. On the first day, many groups came and invaded Po- Poland and nearby country here and different places. Mm-hmm. Now, what was your main job? What did you mostly do for 9 months? I cared about the, the... we had about 600, 700 people- Mm-hmm. ... in three companies. Mm-hmm. With horses and, and, and cars. And I- Was the doctor. I was the doctor. If something happened, I took my horse (laughs). (laughs) And went and helped. And my horse, uh, my next horse, I got... It was, was, was a funny horse, too. Uh, a brown horse. And if the, the next car who had horses, too- Mm-hmm. ... that's I wasn't without a car. Mm-hmm. I was only riding. And if the next car came very near to my horse, then he put their heels back, and I knew what come to, I, I ha- Pull? Pull, very tight to the... And, and then he, uh, elevated his, uh, his back feet. Uh-huh. And destroyed the- The cart. Yeah (laughs). The, the, between the, the horses, the thing. Mm-hmm. He was very, very pleased that look, it worked. (laughs) The horse had its own personality. Yes. (laughs) Now, did you see much fighting? No. You, you only saw the- Nothing. Nothing. Were there a lot of, uh- I saw much burning houses or, or dead soldiers or burned out tanks and some things or, or whatever. But altogether was much. So, what were you feeling at this particular time when you were seeing all this destruction? I was very sorry. I was very sorry because I knew that Germany, uh, that Poland had not... was not armed against Germany and Austria, but against Russia. And because I knew that it must be deeply disappointed, especially the army of that, uh, three, uh, para- Three. Three. Three-year-old Hitler of, of the Germans. Mm-hmm. And on the other side, on the one side- On the Soviet-Nazi pact. On the others... on the one side of the small Poland- Mm-hmm. Germany, uh, the Nazi- Russians. So, again, because Poland had suffered so much from being the corn between the- The two grinders. The two grinders. Grinders. The Rurschleinen. That often been divided again and again- Divided. Again being divided. And they're, of course, had ti- no idea what would be mean to the Polish officers continuing. And it was, it... I was very, I was very sorry. What did the German... what did the propaganda tell you, uh, was the reason for invading Poland? What did the Nazi propaganda say? Why, why would- It couldn't be, it couldn't be any more, uh, they couldn't any more look at this, uh, this, uh, uh, uh, repeated, uh, violations of the German frontier and, and... Did you believe that? Did you believe Poland violated the frontier? Not a second. Did other soldiers believe it?I couldn't help them because they were not interested. I was interested for help, believe it or not. Why were they not, why do you think they were not inter- interested? Because their lives were on the line? Uh, young people have a different, uh, a different, uh, view of danger. Mm-hmm. They... That was, uh, action for them. Interesting. Mm-hmm. At last we are... After we had lost the first war. Mm-hmm. Now, we are the... Now, we are the winner. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. We are good. So, you were the doctor and you were seeing a lot of men coming back injured and a lot of these men were on the front lines and they- Nobody was injured in my only sick. Really? Only diseases you took care of, not actual battle wounds? No. Hm. We had not a single, not a single wounded. Hm, so you weren't- All, all was on the front, the infantry, tanks. Mm-hmm. And that we have no parties down because a few days and it was over. Yeah. It happened too quickly or it happened too quickly- Mm-hmm. ... in those days. Mm-hmm. So did- did anything else happen that's important? I mean- Did they? Did anything else happen important, of importance for you that you observed, uh, during this time or basically during the whole time you were just a doctor that took care of sick, sick individuals? I have nothing. Really nothing heard. Maybe that's it. Were the Polish soldiers very good fighters? I think we had no, uh, fights come up. The only soldier I met, uh, were Russ- Russian groups when we had to go back. Uh, we had been too far to Lemberg and it was Russian territory- Mm-hmm. ... declared. So we had to go back and the Russians, uh, uh... We had to go back and the Russians fol- followed. Mm-hmm. And then one night, they had, uh, they stand... We stand face by face near, near a Russian group. They had a fire in the forest and they stood on the way, and we were on the way, the middle of the night. Mm-hmm. So I could have changed, uh... I- I- I could have, uh, gone in the forest and tell the Russian that I'm... I-I don't like to fight for Hitler. I could have made it. Why didn't you do it? Uh, if I changed, had changed, I was... They could make with me what they liked. Uh-huh. They could shoot me down because they didn't believe in me. They could, uh, put me in any propaganda they like, ahead. I was another skin in another dictator. Dictatorship. Dictator. Mm-hmm. So I... Uh, and on the... On the one... On the other side, it was the very small hope that my cap could be right because it was war- Mm-hmm. ... few days. But I could be perhaps now an accepted member of the German society. Mm-hmm. He had... That was his idea. Mm-hmm. At this time, he was killed. Mm-hmm. He- Your captain? Yes, because he was in that troop. And because the officers were... Their- their distinctions were visible. Mm-hmm. They were easily killed by- by shooting them. Well, what distinguished them, uh, over the others? It was a- a silver cord, a silver cord on the cap. Mm-hmm. So... And everything was different from the Poles. When we met the Russians in that night- Mm-hmm. ... I noticed that nobody was distinct. You couldn't say whether it's a general. They had all the same things without any distinction. But of course they knew who were they, who was the general and who was the captain. But it was... They were... In this respect, they're superior, their organization was superior in- in terms of war to the German troops. When you think so, do you think, um, having all this glitter, the German uniform, that that was not good in the German Army? That was good because it was easy to kill the- the- the- the leading persons. Did it change after Poland in the German army? Very quickly. Huh. Very quickly. Now, after the Polish campaign, what did you do? Were- were you on the Russian-Polish border for a long time? No, not at all. We were, uh, I- I don't... Perhaps one month, not longer. Mm-hmm. We were, uh, again by railway transported in the middle of Germany. Mm-hmm. Near Hanover. Mm-hmm. And we were distributed on the different small villages. Now, what was the feeling of Germany at this time? They just won the war in Poland. Were the German people happy about this or were- were they quiet? Were they scared that more war was coming? What was the general feeling?If you are in my position, it's impossible to get out the feeling that the population. Mm-hmm. I was, after Poland, they made me because... despite it was completely impossible to an officer............................. I looked like it, officer, and every- Oh, you were an officer after Poland? Yes. You became an officer? Yes. It was co- impossible. I couldn't have become that. But- But you did? Yeah, I think obviously, uh, Vienna wasn't want of experienced doctors, experienced in battles and, and war. And so they didn't care about, uh, Nazi propaganda and then Nürnberger Rachel- So they- ... events, and- You think they knew that you were an issue? Sure, sure. In my, in my letters I always had said, uh, "I am not, (laughs) uh, I'm certainly not, uh, you cer- certainly don't want to have a, a Jew in your, in your army." Uh-huh. "Please dismiss me. Uh, uh, don't, uh, uh, don't, uh, make use of my invitation to join them." No. So they knew certainly, and these things are always in, in the papers. This, this paper's accompanying throughout every, every activity and every change in the army. So they made you an officer? Did you- I was the... So I'm quite sure that no German would, against an officer, uh, speak about, uh, about things he perhaps shouldn't say to a, a... only to his best friend. On the other side, the Germans suffered from, from First World War I. Mm-hmm. So they're very happy that they won a war. Huh. Yeah. They, they really, uh, were happy about this, these events. Hmm. Now- And this, this, uh, criminal part of the development had only begun in portion of 1940, 19- 1939 and '40 was not obvious to everybody because only the, the beginning only was obvious. Now in 1939 in Holland, did you know, uh, what was going to happen to the Jews? Did you know that, uh, there was going to be pogroms instigated? No. No? Even after Kristallnacht? We were absolutely kept back from any information, any political information. We didn't know anything. What about in Kristal- you mean Kristallnacht? Um, you know, in 1938, November 9th and 10th? '98? I was at the army. Did, did you know about Kristallnacht? No. Not, not before, afterward, of course. Uh-huh. And what were you told afterward? Are you talking after the war or are you talking after the event? I don't know when I got, uh, notice of it. Hmm. Now getting back to your military service. So, you came back to Hanover after... or the region of Hanover. And what happened then? Especially in Hanover, it would be impossible to listen, to be serious about such in, in a- Mm-hmm. ... average German house. Right. We are all in private, in privacy. Yeah. Uh, we were all as farmers and I was, uh, uh, of course, in any meeting on the burgermeister. Mm-hmm. Or I was in... at the political, uh, man. And, uh, we became really friends. And what- He was the burgermeister of the year? Yes, yes. Of what village, do you remember? Um, called Köpenick, I, I, I believe. And once I, I told him what I am. You did? Yes, I did. And what did he say? He said, "Heavens!" And I left all the stamps on my desk. Left all my stamps? What are his stamps? His stamps. Oh, stamps. Uh, uh, uh, not stamps. Uh, sticks- Yeah, yeah, rubber stamps. Yes, rubber stamps, with all this, uh, Hitler emblems and for all purposes. (laughs) And- Oh, he thought he offended you because he found it on your desk? In the moment I was the, the, the biggest enemy of me. I was a, a, a spy. I was, uh... Yeah. The, the personal side, he, he wasn't able to understand that I, I'm a human being. Perhaps about to become a German. (laughs) So he immediately turned on you. To him, I was... from that moment, I was his enemy- Hmm. ... despite my officer cap and order. He was deeply... he was, he was in, in, in greatest danger in these rubber stamps. (laughs) (laughs) That I could mis- make misuse of it. Huh. Now, at this time did you regret telling him? Did I? Regret? It's like in medicine. It has, it has no sense, makes no sense to regret if you did the wrong thing. You can only learn from your faults. Yeah. I, I don't regret why. So what'd you learn? We, we were friends, I think, only for a fortnight or three, three weeks, and then we were enemies. (laughs) So what- I survived. So what'd you learn from it? And after the war-... my-- his wife wrote to me. I don't know how she got my address. She wrote to me, "Dear Robert Brown, you know you have been such a friend of mine." Ah. Husband and in, in the last days he had, like my mother, like that. In the last days, he did something becau- before the Americans came or British came, and he was captured. Uh, obviously, he, uh, he had taken his gun or any... or, or, I don't know. It, it was certainly nothing, really nothing. But obviously, he was accused for that, and she forgot the address and, and wrote to me that I was a, his big friend, and he, oh, he spoke of me, what a fine guy I was. And, and so, and I should give him a certificate that he really was my best friend and, uh... What did you do? Did you write back? (laughs) I laughed at it. You laughed at it? No. Laughter. That's not the way to get, to get certificates. Hmm. Now, what, during this time, uh, when you were outside of Hanover, were you training or what were you doing in this little village? Uh, you are doing what ev- in everywhere in such a situation, um, happens. You were, uh, you had to do something to, so you, uh, part... one third was always at home- Mm-hmm. ... sent at home, and the other had to care for their horses, and, and their cars and so... just to do something. Mm-hmm. Huh. So when- And in those days, I noticed that the average matrimony isn't strong enough to, for the partners to stand up because nearly in every house where our soldiers were, uh, sent to, to, to stay there, was a wife whose husband was soldier on the front everywhere, somewhere. Hmm. And in very many houses that began sexual affairs. It was really normal. The simple wives and the simple men were isolated both. Hmm. So it happened. And that, that, uh, was that a shock to you? Or was that, was that, uh, did that make you feel strange? I mean, I guess, I guess is a good word. It, it, it- Was that upsetting? Was that- It made me sick about what a matrimony can stand and what it can not stand. Hmm. Now, did you- It's better for, for matrimony if such a situation doesn't happen, happen. Hmm. Now, at this time, were you dating any Germans or Austrians at this time? Were you dating a Jewish woman, or were you dating anyone during this time? What? (background noise). I mean, did, did you have a relationship with a girl and, and what was- (Background noise). Did you have one, a relationship with- Never. ... with a German? (Background noise). Uh, in, in those days when I was with the army- Yeah. ... I was, I had a friend, uh, in, in Austria. Hmm. How long had- I had a friend, a girlfriend in Austria. And how long did you date with her? Uh, it took about, I think two, two years. Now, were there any problems with you being a half Jew? No. She, I think she, she had some Jewish ancestor, ancestors, too. So it was no problem? No. So during the war, you kept a relationship going? During the war, uh, that, uh, took, uh, um... During the time we had been, uh, we had, uh, we stuck, stick, stuck together. Mm-hmm. During the entire message, of course. Mm-hmm. But, uh, it was not even her I could have married because in my position it was marriage at all impossible. Why? Why was it impossible? By, um, Nuremberg Laws. If I, uh, if I, uh, loved a German, it was Rassenscharfe. I had to be killed. And she, too. But you were an officer in the German Army. Well, that's a ridiculous part of the story. Now, so what happened? Because of this, this problem with the Nuremberg Laws, did you have to break up, or what did you do? Because of the Nuremberg Laws, what did you do with your relationship? Did you break up, uh, with your friends, or? With what? Yeah. It has nothing to do with the Nuremberg Laws because this had been started '35 and was immediately available on, uh, you know, valid for, for offshore too 1938. So it was ready. So you never thought that we could get married? Never. Because you would be killed- Only with the person in my situation. Ah, a half-Jew. That was possible. But I, I never heard of such a marriage, marriage. Now, did your father, when you were born, did he have you circumcised?... my father? Yeah, did he have you- I never took a shower with him. No, did he have you take a shower? No, I was... He was Christian before we changed and my mother was- Hmm. ... in Christ, so I was normally Christian. Now getting back to your military experience, when the invasion of, you know, Norway and the Netherlands and France began, where were you and what were you doing? After that war, First World, we came to the- Yeah, after the Polish campaign. ... to the French, to the election, uh, border of Luxembourg- Mm-hmm. ... and invaded 1940 Luxembourg, Belgium with my artillery and- 44th Panzer. ... 44th Panzer back to France. And then, uh, turned around and- Went south. ... went to France, Paris. Mm-hmm. And stopped only in, in, on the Spanish border. That's where we had lost- Mm-hmm. ... had our, uh, uh, stuff. Now, what was the feeling of the troops, uh, in the invasion of France? Were the Germans happy about invading France in the war? Certainly. They were? Certainly. So there was a lot of energy and aggressive spirit? Certainly. They had finished what in the first world war was not possible to get. France had capitulated. Did you see- We had, we had the- Excuse me. Did you see much, uh, of the battle, uh, the battle that the 44th Panzer undertook or were you always behind the line? Uh, we had been always behind the line. I remember a single attack in the night of, uh, uh, open, um, plane, open French plane. But he, at last, didn't, uh, shell bombs on our unit. Now, did you ever have to engage in battle? Did you ever have to fire a weapon? Uh, no. No. Oh, I don't think I had to use a pistol. Did you ever have to use that pistol? No. You never had to defend yourself? No. There was no, no resistance at all. We went and, uh, along the streets, left and, and right, there are thousands and thousands and thousands of, of cars of the army. Oh. French Army. And, and, and between the streets, hundred thousands of human beings flo- uh, from, uh, to the south, on their way to the south. So- Uh, like, uh, dead- Yes. ... dead, uh, dead, dead soldiers? Nearly none. I can't, I can't remember. So many of them were just wounded? Huh? Do you understand my questions right? Yes. Uh, you said thousands and thousands human beings. Does it mean they were just wounded, or were they dead, or what? Yeah, uh, wouldn't you be telling him that he was, like, wounded or, uh, died here? I didn't see any wounded or dying as I remember. They were just dead? The only, the only, uh, were Aust- uh, German, I thought. They were dead? Uh, I, I'll tell you what, what I did to see. Once, uh, we were very near to a, um, a hill where a flight counter- Counterattack? ... counter, flight counter-artillery- Mm-hmm. ... had to be installed. Mm-hmm. And this, uh, this company went up the hill- Mm-hmm. ... and about 60 persons sat on two open, uh, cameo trucks- Mm-hmm. ... on the side with their feet down. Mm-hmm. All around the people. And when they were nearly on the hill, a mine exploded. They had a lot of mines stick together- Mm-hmm. ... stuck together, and they exploded at once. You can imagine what happened. All those knees and- Hmm. ... shoes and feet were shot. And I was the only doctor. Uh, I was only a man. And as I, uh, the, the two comrades who had, uh, had not been wounded, uh, um, uh, searched for a doctor, or where's a doctor, I- I was there. Please come. Terrible thing. And I said, "All right." And when I, I wasn't halfway, they, instantly I was killed by, by one of them. You were hit? I, I was hit by one of them, not killed. (laughs) Yeah. I was hit. Why? He showed me, "You nearly had, had, uh, uh, touched another mine." I was just putting my foot on a mine or another mine. And, and, and he just- Mm-hmm. ... he threw it. So, that's one of the many occasions you could without fighting be killed, too.Hmm. And I went up and these people were very, very helpful, comrades, of course. And I said, "I have no idea how to handle this so- in such a situation." I wasn't learned. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm, the trauma and all that. I don't, didn't know anything about triage. Do you know about triage? It's a new, new, uh, concept in medicine which means if you come to a, an accident, a great accident, you have to, uh, to look at all of them just the same, uh, where, where help is useful and necessary- Uh-huh. ... first. Mm-hmm. So, I, I invented triage at the moment. I say, "Lay, uh, lay these people down." There were about, uh, 50 or 60, 50, 50 or 60 persons. Lay them down. And I, I started with the first... At the moment, I invented it. Mm-hmm. I looked... I, I, I lifted the arms and I, I looked at the, at, at the feet. Mm-hmm. And I started to, where the arms after this were, uh, ruptured. Mm-hmm. And the feet, after each, after they were ruptured, too late. We would have to involve the- Team. ... 300 doctors and, and 300 operation rooms. So you left them alone. And, and blood, uh, tons of blood for, for all these people. So you left them alone. So, uh, I go, I had thought that, "Sorry, sorry, sorry." Uh, maybe, and so... And, and I had no pencil, but I, I had in mind all these things. And I said to these people, "I'm sorry, we'll, uh... But this and this and this and this can be transported, and, and this and this must be done something." Mm-hmm. And so, I had, uh- Now, were all these men watching you at this time? These wounded? Uh, some of them were unconscious. Some were dying. Mm-hmm. Some were dead. Some were crying. One, I remember, he said, "Mama, Mama." (German) Hmm. But I, of course, had to be strong. This was nu- nu- nullify crying myself, no? I had- Did you feel like crying, or no? No, no. I, I had the idea I must, uh, save lives as, as much as, as possible. Mm-hmm. And then they came a few, uh, people who had bandages and I directed them where to do what. Mm-hmm. And I watched, uh, one more, made my, my all around. I looked at all of them where they had given the, um... I had each situation, uh, good, uh, judge? Mm-hmm. And when I finished my, my round, I saw three people. A general doctor, another, uh, corner doctor, and another highly great doctor. One of my dying patients, they cared for him. They looked to suppress the artery. Mm-hmm. But I didn't know which degree they had. I, I had only looked for my patient. Mm-hmm. And I, I shouted (laughs) at the three people, "Didn't you look at the, at the, at this, at the, at the, uh, feet, at the legs that there are, they're bleeding." Mm-hmm. "Ruptured this artery, ruptured this artery." Really, no blood in the corpse and you're trying to suppress the one artery. The more of the lasting blood will, will, uh, will be pushed out in the, in the last, uh, in the few seconds or minutes he has to live. Mm-hmm. So I and the general (laughs) called, uh... (laughs) He didn't say any word. I was not a, I was nothing, uh, over there, in those days. Mm-hmm. So I acted. (laughs) And they, what did these men do? They just didn't say a word? No. So they continued to put pressure- They asked me what, what, what I can do. And then I told them- They asked you for advice? Yes. I asked them what I had judged could, could be saved, which, which poor men I had put us for- So do you think they were just stupid or do you think they, under the battle trauma, I mean, the, you know, the war situation, they were not thinking straight? They panicked, they- No. Uh, not en- not enough- Brain power? Not enough brain power. They, uh, what, what I did automatically without any training. Mm-hmm. They only knew that if someone bled, you have to suppress the artery. (laughs) But, but the other artery was disrupted as well and, and this all arteries, all disrupted. They didn't even think, "So it must be a trauma too." Maybe it was the first contact with, with such a, uh, with such a, uh, in such an accident. Now, when you were making your selections were any of the men that you had to say, "You must die." Yes. Yeah. Did any of them hear you say that? Did any of these men hear you say that? Uh, I didn't say that they, they will die. Ah. You said, "Leave alone?" I, I said this with other words. Oh yeah, so how did you handle, how did you handle- We do it, we do it with great assumptions, I don't know. Okay, huh, interesting.... I learned later on that you are hearing when dying or nearly dying, very much. Can you... What now? Patients, unconscious patients. Mm-hmm. Like Martha, how she would go, she fell unconscious with meningitis. Mm-hmm. And she feared something was then I had no curing, she was completely unconscious. Hmm. She remembered afterward. So I was, uh- Even with the unconscious patients, you're very careful. Yes. Yeah. But I knew that from my practice too. Huh. Now during this... You know, during this time you were... You described your, your mental conflict being half Jewish and also having this other side, this doctor side of you, uh, that wants to care, and then having this huge paradox that you were in the German army. Yes. Uh, at, at any particular time, did you ever feel like, you know, here I am with these "Nazis", I'm going to try to sabotage them, like with poisoning their medicines or not care for certain people, and so on? Or was your overriding goal always to take care of people whether they were a fanatic Nazi or whether they were just a farm boy? I had, I had humanitarian tasks. Okay. So I'm not caring about racial or political. Mm-hmm. That's, that's my task. Uh, uh, disregard- Hmm. ... disregard, uh, whether these are enemies or, or friends. Hmm. As a doctor I, I can't have differences. It's impossible. Now during this time, Poland and also in France, what were the viewpoints of your comrades? What was your comrade's viewpoints of Hitler? What did they think of Hitler? What were men's opinions of Hitler at this time? It was a wincing, wincing army. A victorious- A, a victorious army. One, one victory after the other. No end of victories. So they supported Hitler? Yes. So people were very excited about the new Germany? More or less. More or less. Even the Austrians? More or less. Even the Austrians? More or less. Hmm. It's a very good... In the book I gave you. Mm-hmm. The paradox, you must, you must be happy if Germany is defeated, you must happy if your house is, uh, bombed out. If, if you are dead, if only, if only that, uh, Nazi, um, uh, um, that, that, uh- Outbreak? ... that society is, uh, is defeated. That was... I was forced to fight against my friends and I was forced, eventually, to be a good doctor for my enemies. That was my situation. Did you ever find yourself, during this time, being happily or surprised at being happy at the victory? That there was like two sides within you? In those, in those years, I was only sorry. I began only to, to breathe with the American and the Russian and the English, uh, uh, victories pronounced. Hmm. So- Th- these were my, my victories. Yeah. So what kept you living in, in 1940? What kept pushing you, uh, to do your job and so on? Because in 1940 it looked like Germany was going to be victorious everywhere. Oh, all over. What kept me living? There was still the hope that I would be... Uh, I, I would be, um, become an respected member of the German society. Hmm. As long as, as I was fighting for the army. Mm-hmm. There was- Hope. ... hope, yes. Now, what happened- Especially when I was, uh, I became officer. Hmm. Now what happened... Okay, you took care of getting back to the situation with all these wounded that had their legs blown off. They were never mind. When you finally got the situation under control, what happened next? What did you do next after you made the selections and now who should live and who should not live? Uh, it was a very good, um, um... German Army was very good in, in, in, uh, connections, uh- Mm-hmm. ... by radio and phone. Oh, okay. So, at once I watched a lot of cars and, and, and, and, and- People moving away. So I, I made my... I controlled these people who really did something and not just stupid like the general. And, uh, so I went to my unit. So you made a report on these stupid doctors that you had to work with? I, I didn't make any report as far as I remember. Hmm. Now did you receive any medals or any honors for what you did? Yes, yes, I think after Poland I got the army... You got, you got in what? What? In what, what army did you... I mean, what, uh- Some ex distinction. Huh. And did you get a distinction in France? I can't remember where I got it. So when did- No, because of France, I didn't get any distinction. You didn't get- I was always before... Or was it in Germany? We called it (German).... get Brie fleisch out because it was a very cold winter. So that was the free of life for us. (laughs) Now, what happened after we, say, in this, in this story, you came from France and she said, what happened next? Where did you go next with your division? We, we stopped at the Spanish bor- border and then we are distributed. Mm-hmm. And one day, I was, uh, uh, ordered to, uh, see our general, Raul. Mm-hmm. At the step somewhere and he, uh, told me that I... he had to dismiss me from the army. Uh, and all right, I accepted it and I had to- Did he give any reasons why? No, he didn't say anything but he, he was obviously... I, I hear it from his voice. Uh, his voice was not his normal voice. Uh, he, he was obviously sad. I'm, I'm, I'm really... maybe he was, uh, had even tears in his eyes. I had an impression and then he gave me the hand and said, uh, "The very best. Very best. Get out of the base." Why did you think you were getting dismissed from the army? To me, it was evident if the others fighted, uh, continued fight- fighting, and I had to go home because I was condemned to death because of racial racism. Oh- Because no, not a second, uh, not a second I had another, um- (background noise) No, ask me, ask me the right before. I was asking you, why... so do you think one of the reasons or maybe the main reason for you being dismissed from the army was because you were "additionally"? The only, only addition. No other. Did any oth- did any general or any officer tell you that was the reason why? (coughs) No. There were only two reasons that I was able to leave the army because many of the old, uh, men wanted to go home. Mm-hmm. So, uh, they didn't... uh, I was really... uh, I, I didn't go, uh, they, they didn't shake hands and, and, uh, say something. Nobody asked me why. They already had the opinion I-