[HEBREW TRANSLATION] 1939. Yeah. Uh, (speaks German). Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. And then, the army had to also have complete and total power. They had the intention to overthrow Hitler. Mm-hmm. But then, Hitler got into (speaker voice growls). Mm-hmm. Then he was, he took over *******. Hmm. And then, it was before the war against France, uh, also, uh, sent him to, to, to direct the military, but then they, they, they second his plans was to form a mass command. Mm-hmm. And then, uh, higher up, the people who were in charge. Mm-hmm. He thought he was... He, he had the attention of the group to participate in that area. Mm-hmm. And then, when he went, this is all, and he didn't take action. Why do you think he didn't take action? Because it wasn't right. Did you, did you ever ask him? Did you have any contact with Hitler? Oh, no, naturally not at all. You have no contact with him because everybody had definitely technical difficulty with Hitler's staff. Huh. So, you mentioned you had contact with, uh, von Kleist and- Yeah, well that was different because I was... He was a, he was a field marshal with Stumpf. Okay. But with other, uh, uh, people within the staff, I had no, had no contact. Hmm. So, your main motivation to fight was to eventually have the opportunity to overthrow the regime? No, I felt that only the army could take action. And I, I, I hoped that would happen, but it didn't happen, see? Hmm. Hmm, interesting. Now- Well, and, and that's because... That, that's very difficult to understand, and probably also not easy to explain to the last, uh, completely why. But you see, retrospectively- Mm-hmm. ... we're all prepared after Germany in '33. Mm-hmm. But afterward, they were always, if you come from the, from the power, you always watch everything. Mm-hmm. At the moment when they first, they saw the British bomb there, uh, a long time. Then the war came and said, "Well, uh, do we have anything to do with the army?" The army is the only institution that can take action against this. And again, they had many, many, many attempts, but they never worked. And before the four walls, to, to raise it was a failure. Hmm. Now, speaking about '44, you're talking about the bombing attempt, um, why didn't someone just take a pistol into one of these conferences and shoot Hitler? Not whatever, he went on business or something like that. But he was able- But he was only able to stick the... Only was able to stick the bomb in there. But, um, when the bomb was laid, uh, it, it, a bomb was taken into this conference room. Yeah. And it was put there, uh, and there was two, I think two men that were killed by this bomb- Yeah. ... who were actually people in the plot, correct? Or were friends- Uh- ... of the people who were in the plot. Yes, I know that. Is that correct or incorrect? Uh, well, that is also out in the story. Mm-hmm. You know? Uh, but I'm not... Well, that's the person who was sympathetic, who was sympathizers. Mm-hmm. And that was the risk you had to take, you see? Mm-hmm. It wasn't, uh, a very heavy responsibility, but you see, Stauffenberg had, oh, they had two fingers of power after that time. Mm-hmm. He had lost one eye. He couldn't use a pistol. And then, the pistol, you know, they should be rare, uh, should be very difficult now. Mm-hmm. And now, almost, uh, nothing, you know? But if someone could take a bomb into a room, it would be easy to take a pistol in as well. No, you see, the difference. But if it was in a briefcase? Yeah, well you can put a briefcase there. Mm-hmm. But probably, uh, the subaltern or the general, they wouldn't allow it. You see, only, only those who had access to Hitler. Mm-hmm. They probably could have a pistol or a briefcase or a bomb, but I don't know. Hmm. Interesting. (coughs) There might be also some ideas to really... Of, uh, of how to push it. He wanted to, to, uh, to make a show of modern equipment to Hitler, and then to blow himself up together with Hitler if it worked. There have been many, many attempts, but they didn't work. Hmm. But there were only a very, very restricted number of people who had access. And then, of those, let me say, 20 or 30 who had access to Hitler, who was going to have to do it? It was not... There was General Steef- Mm-hmm. ... who became obviously the Historian book. He said, "Hitler must be liquidated." Mm-hmm. But he said, "Well, I can't do it." Hmm. There were, where you can't even... It just, it, it... Probably, Bush and Kleist were the younger officers. Mm-hmm. They had the guts to do it, but Steef was already ten years older and probably made out. Mm-hmm. And he was married. I don't know. It, it, it was a great decision for him. I want, I knew what Steef would do if he was Hitler.... was excited about that because we were allowed to do that. Yeah. Now, when you were an ambassador in Moscow- No, no, no. No, when. When you were, in the '30s. Or no, not ambassador, but- No, no, no. I was attache. Attache, excuse me. Um, ambassador in England. Uh, attache in, in Moscow during the '30s, did you ever feel excited about what Hitler was doing? Yes, actually I, I was excited about it because he became more and more similar. Oh, he became more... So- I, I realized already in '34, after the Rhine push, I said, "Well, that will end any more at all." I was convinced of it. And I had to see this stuff except up here, the vision. Mm-hmm. And he came... I had the vision that we would lose the war because I think I, I was very right. And I heard also that when, when, uh, in '39, I warned the English and France and the Americans and the Canadians that Hitler will sign a pact with Stalin and not you. Mm-hmm. Because when I was right, they were wrong. Mm-hmm. Now- But they didn't believe it. They couldn't believe that Stalin and Hitler would come to that. Now, when you entered the army, were you ever scared about, uh, people finding out that your grandmother was Jewish? Oh, they knew it. They knew it? Yeah. So everyone knew you were initially, uh, second degree black card? They knew about that. Uh, uh, he, he... And I, I wasn't expected to be. Mm-hmm. He could have said, "No, I don't think you are." He told me. I didn't know him before. So there was no- It was just after my birth. Yeah. Um, yeah, I'm seeing it on the, the camera. Um, now, were you ever scared that if, um, people found out that you had a regiment in your basically volunteer, uh, army, you know, from the southern part of Russia, um, that you had Jews in the regiment, were you ever scared that if the German high command found out about this that you might be in trouble? No, as well as my mother. Because that regiment was not my regiment. Mm-hmm. I was not in the regiment. The general touching off the general problem, problem. Mm-hmm. And so he had to do something because I was with ACP officer, not ACPC. I was never like that. I was made up then. Now, in a military sense, what was the best thing you did during World War II? Well, I will tell you very straight answer is, uh, with quite amusing, uh, in my book. At Christmas '40- Mm-hmm. ... my division commander, he went and he paid for his soldiers. He said, "You go to France and buy for every man in your division, he got 50,000, he bought a bottle of red wine in France." And I said, "Well, I have no, I have no French money," because there was French occupation money and Polish occupation money. Then you will get Polish occupation money. I said, "Well, I'll pay with Polish occupation money." I said, "Well, you, you, you, you, you have sent me as an order to go and do this." And so I had the French in the right bar. Right. You know, I went to see him. I said, "I have, um, 50,000 zloty and you change them into 50,000 francs." But the country, the relation was different. He did it. Then I went with two men and a, a, a town master, you know. We went to Bordeaux and my father had inherited, by the family from mama, had inherited a vineyard in, in Barba. Okay, yeah. A little property where he grew wine. And he had relations with this farm in Bordeaux with Kretzmann. Mm-hmm. He probably was a German. I forgot some years ago. Anyway, it was a very famous, still now very famous wine merchant. So I went to see Kretzmann and said, "I am the people of Potok." Right? And I said... He said, "All right." He sat down with me. "I'm delighted to see you." And then I said, "I want to buy 50,000 bottles of wine from you." And he said, "Okay, fine." And then I bought also the Romaine. You know, very good wine. And then I had a... I just had a wonderful mission. It was just wonderful. And then my town master came up and he said, "Well, all the wine has been stopped by the local military command." And then I said, "Well, that's not very good." Then I went to go before command and said the issue, and they allowed me immediately. Mm-hmm. Because I was German. Uh-huh. They thought it was good. Then I asked, "Who is the commanding general?" That was Commander Albi Cau. And he was heavily armed. Mm-hmm. And then I found out he had an order that he go- he had to go to the Obergruppenführer. Then I went to the Obergruppenführer and I, I said, "Here am I, Roman von Melmann, from the Russian Camolino. (laughs) And I have to give you many greetings from your friend, General Fett. Oh, he said, how old is General Fett? I said, well, he's... You know, I thought that General Fett was not too well because he sent me here to France to buy 50,000 bottle of wine. And you understand that this is a sector of him. Just come back tomorrow to see me. And then, uh-... I, I come back to World War I, and I, I, I came back to, to Poland. Uh, not one world of, of, of, uh, where did I come from? It was only (mumbling). That was your best military- Yes, it was very, very good. Hmm. Interesting. One day, I will, I will also describe it, but I didn't put it into my book because it is a tough book about, uh, the criteria you see. Mm-hmm. It's basically if you've done too many unusual stuff, and people look backward. Hmm. I understand. Now, what would be, uh, the cruelest thing that you saw- Mm-hmm. ... while you were, um, uh, a soldier? Uh, well, uh, dying, but I decided in my book when I saw a, a cell next to the railroad, uh, track, and we were transported from, from Russia back to Germany in order to be confirmed to be sent to this- Mm-hmm. ... and I saw corpses of, of, of Russian soldiers who died there. Then, I realized that they were just on the deathbed dying, because they were starved to death, and so forth, and so forth. That was horrible. Yes, that impression I had. Now, did you, did you know about the Holocaust during the war? Did you know about the concentration camps and- Uh- ... the Eichmann movement? ... well, I, I, I was sent to a book group. I eventually knew that... Well, we didn't know that, that Jews were liquidated behind the German lines. I knew of that before we flew together with Stauffenberg, but I think it was for sure even sooner than that. Mm-hmm. Before I did know that. (coughs) But the concentration camps, what happened there, we found out because the, his, uh, members, uh, uh, members of the Caucasian nation, sentiment, were sentenced because of murder or, or rape, and they were kept in concentration camps. And then, he, at one time, uh, the General Central said also, uh, the judicial officer of the German army- Mm-hmm. ... he wanted to know, he wanted to know what happened to these people. Mm-hmm. And then, they asked, uh, permission to go to a concentration camp. And then, they were told, "Oh, you won't get the permission." And anyhow, these people had to work real hard to earn their lives. And that, that was the second group they got. Mm-hmm. And then, I got also a leaflet from the Russians, but they were also part of the Third Reich, so we didn't trust what it said. Mm-hmm. Anyway, after 1942, I didn't know that, but it, because at the time, at the time we read in it, it said we, we, it was behind the line. We were fighting for the war- (coughs) ... and we didn't touch the food. Mm-hmm. Now, after you found out about the concentration camps- Yeah. ... were you ever scared because of your family's past, what might happen to you or your mother, uh, or your father? No, my, my grandmother died during the war, and before her death she felt why I must write a book, and she wrote me about it, told me all. Otherwise, she would have killed me. She would have killed me during detention. Mm-hmm. Were you in fear that maybe you or your father were in danger? No, no. You know, I, you see, I was no longer in danger, because I was, I, I went into the war as a non-commissioned officer. Mm-hmm. Not much. (coughs) And specifically was to get a promotion to, to, to be a Lieutenant. Mm-hmm. I put myself up to the end of the war as, as not my job. But that way, that wouldn't have been everybody would have known what was going on there. And so, I got the special permission to serve in the army as officer up to the end of the war. Mm-hmm. So, when the war ended, then one day, I was no more an officer. (laughs) Because we, we were not allowed to do the war. And I, I thought... And there was another case, a discovery that was after the war. Uh, that if his name was, I think Krakow. Mm-hmm. Not sure. And he was, uh, he was, uh, a corporal in, in, in the SS. Mm-hmm. And he became a lieutenant, and he was officer of my family. So, I discovered that after the war. And what was his name, Corporal? Krakow. Krakow. I, I think Krakow. Was he- He started, he's the cook. How do you spell his name? Uh. K-R-A-T-K-O-W, Krakow. Well, in which book do you remember? You know, I can, I can find that out. Mm-hmm. How long did it take though, I think? A year. Oh. I can, I can find that out. I can also give you the... Can you hold the book? Mm-hmm. (coughs) Thanks. He was, I don't know what, uh, how it happened that he could, he could become an officer, but he, he was also promised to raise money for the Japanese after the war. He got- Was he Jewish? Mischling? He was a Mischling, yeah. A Mischling. That's in the book. Huh. Interesting. Did you have a lot of contact with him during the war? No, I didn't know him during the war. Did you have any- I, I, I knew him only after the war. Mm-hmm. He was, he was a very famous, uh, ambassador to the Tsar. Mm-hmm. And later on, uh, when, when the...... we should do is get you recon- recon- reconstructed in Wetenborg, where he was a victim of reconstruction work after, after 1949. And where did he serve when he was in the Wehrmacht? In the French, French, front, French army, yeah. In Russia? (coughs) In Russia? Yes, yes. In Russia. I feel really, uh, uh, uh, I- I think there's a name of this book and then you can read the book. Oh, great. Um, so earlier you said when France and England declared war on Germany, you knew the war was over then. Well, I knew... uh, I knew for sure that the war was lost, so that's why I've written in, uh, in my book, uh, under 26th of August, my colonel and I had gone to Lille, he said, "Our friend is accused as a diplomat. What will happen?" I said, "We lose the war if he has to do this." Mm-hmm. It's in my book if you're interested in reading about it. Um, did you receive any honors or medals, uh, during the war? Yes. Uh, Iron Cross First and Second Class. Wha- what did you do to receive the Iron Cross First Class and Second Class? Well, at first I was, uh, I did my duty, you see? Which was? Well, I was, uh, I was... I had also, uh, I had also, uh, (german), that means that you have participated three attacks. Mm-hmm. Do you think that's the Iron Cross for that? No, that one is for bravery. Well, this is only attack, uh, because we had to be very careful. They didn't give any certificates to me. Hmm. Um- By, by the way, I, I, I, I described to all that I get, uh, I got first class, I was damaged. Mm-hmm. Yeah, I know. So- Mm-hmm. So you, you got to, uh, you keep... they want to make yourself in the front line. Mm-hmm. I would say it was like, like, like, uh, uh, uh, a, a position to attach, you know? Mm-hmm. After some time, you got it. Mm-hmm. And if I had, uh, went on, uh, uh, uh, on with it- (coughs) ... then I probably would have, uh, you know, charged a lot more, uh, a lot more money. Mm-hmm. Did, um, were you ever scared to die? Very much so. Mm-hmm. But you always have to overcome your fear. Mm-hmm. And how did you do that? Uh, you just have to decide right away. (laughs) (laughs) You just, you have to go through it. You have, you have to have duty, you see? Mm-hmm. Did you ever think about running over to the Russian lines? No, because I, I, that wouldn't... that wouldn't be worth. Mm-hmm. Stalin was as bad as Hitler. But if somebody asked me, uh, asked me, uh, "Why didn't you run over?" I said, "Well, in the past, uh, uh, uh, something that was important, I could have run over two times." Mm-hmm. It was not very, uh, uh, effective for me. Mm-hmm. And then I was on, on the Western Front, and then I made it through. That was, uh, I, I, I, I, I, uh, it took some time to come back to the British, uh, Army Corps, and I'd be only captured, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, figure that's not true, I told that story before. And then I was again on the Russian Front. Mm-hmm. And then I never was, uh, in Africa, but in Africa, I might have had an opportunity if they run out of ammunition, run out of fuel. Mm-hmm. (coughs) I would have waited until the British came or the Americans as a prisoner. I'm always hoping that they would take me to Italy. Mm-hmm. But I said, well, I, I for a moment now stayed in August '44. Mm-hmm. Where I really thought it over what to do, because I was in danger, because I was very much involved with the struggle. Mm-hmm. So I said there's a possibility to go to the Austrian resistance in the mountains. That's what they did for me. Or, to go to Tivoli, because people around there said that they think started there. Mm-hmm. I didn't do it because I felt bad about my family living there. And so I went back to the line here, so to speak. Be there, do not die first. Hmm. You know? Now, what- There, there I considered to, to, to actually go, to run away to safety, but then I can't do it because I risked the life of my family. Mm-hmm. Which, uh, retrospectively, it shouldn't have happened because, uh, although we were persecuted, their wives were arrested sometimes, and the children were taken away, but they were not killed. Mm-hmm. But I thought then, I can't do it because I can't put the life of my friends or my family in that situation. Mm-hmm. Did you have... now, were you close friends with Sachsenberg? Please? Were you close, were you close with, with Sachsenberg? Sachsenberg? Yeah, you just mentioned the gentleman in your plot, in von Plot, and you were close to him. Sachsenberg? Yeah, Sachsenberg. Were you close with him? What? Close. Did you get a good relationship with- Yes, very close. I worked with him. You know, it's my book. You can see, '42, I worked in his department. Mm-hmm. And why do you not think he acted, he did not act earlier in trying to aid you? Well, uh, because, uh, he thought that the generals ought to do that, not the co- beginning of officers. Mm-hmm. And then he went to Africa, you know? Mm-hmm. And then coming back- Mm-hmm. ... from Africa- Uh-huh. ... he decided, "Now, the generals won't do it, I have to do it."Hmm. Now, what, why- You want to talk about my book? Yeah. Why wasn't there more of a, a push against, uh, Hitler? Like in '38, Beck and a whole bunch of people before he went, I think they marched into Czechoslovakia. They were ready to overthrow him. Yes. And then he had a political success and, uh- It was impossible. Mm-hmm. Because after the war, he had... Because of all the... After the war ￼(coughing drowns out speaker) everybody in Germany thought that this man should be emperor, so they took an internal war like the First World War. (coughs) And then, unfortunately, Hitler was right because he conquered the whole of France without having losses. It was very different from the First World War. Mm-hmm. So he was right, and his government was too ￼(unclear). And that was the real fatal event in, in, in history of, of the Second World War. Mm-hmm. He won... Because heavy losses are supposed to be won, he won the war several times, because he thought we would, we're heading for war, he would end up with the same thing like in the First World War. That's when he faced the (unintelligible) at the time. So psychologically, uh, taking over France was very damaging to the high command. Uh, no, it wasn't. The benefit was missed an opportunity to take over Britain. Mm-hmm. And was, uh, uh, the result that I thought we would have been wrong. But it was von Manstein's plan, uh, how to take over France that brought him success. Well, that's, that, that's, that's true. But von Manstein also, Manstein was a, uh, he was brilliant general, but, uh, I think he always refused to take up any offense against Hitler. Why? He was so frustrated during '42- Well, no- '43, and '44. Yes, but he never, he was never ready to go on the offensive. Mm-hmm. He would have if he had been successful, probably it would have been on our side. (coughs) But he didn't want to, to take action himself. Hmm. Um, did you have much contact with von Manstein ever? No, never. We never talked. Hmm. Now, um, when did you begin to start talking about your World War II experiences? Huh? When did you begin to talk about your World War II experiences, what happened? You wrote this book about 10 years ago. Yes, well, uh, uh, I said a lot about it in the beginning that if you have been a failure, uh, so you need to speak about it. I don't know the events. See, we had other things we had to reconcentrate on. Mm-hmm. And, uh, well... And then, uh, as pure coincidence, this is in my book, I met Fred Kahn. (coughs) He said... He, he was the chief of, director of the, director of the American Institute of, uh, of Advanced Japanese Studies. I met him in, in Aspen. Mm-hmm. And, uh, he said, "Do you know Johnny Yowah?" I said, "I know Johnny too well." Uh, I said, "Why?" Uh, uh, uh, he said- (coughs) He said, "Johnny, I'd like to talk to you because you're here and many, many spies, diplomatic spies in America and Britain and Germany never said a word." And so, he, he wants me to speak. Mm-hmm. Then, then, then I read above all the report and then he said a few reasons. He wanted to see if there's a problem in my book. If he saw some images in there from that, and then I said, "I should translate into German so that otherwise people could..." And I had something for the Germans. Hmm. And by the way, there's been something in Italian and now three years gone in Polish language that I have from the best seller. It sold 33,000 copies in six weeks. Hmm. The only thing I changed it now, it's still out. Now, did you, during this time, ever identify yourself with the Jews? When you heard about what was happening in the concentration camps, did you feel like, "Here's something happening to my people? Uh, I gotta save them," because of, you know, your grandmother being Jewish? Uh, my feeling, I was, I would say that it was a crime. Mm-hmm. You know? Uh, because it was something that was not good, but I thought it was a crime too. Mm-hmm. The Holocaust was a crime. Mm-hmm. (coughs) So, it was, it was not a particular people that you were, uh, looking to, uh, uh, the criminal acts. Surely, uh, uh, the human part, the, uh, what they were doing, you know? Mm-hmm. Um, now, nowadays, do you experience your past very often? Huh? Do you experience your past, your World War II experiences very often? No. Um, for example, do you dream, uh, about it or do you think a lot about this time? Uh, I have some, uh, uh, sometimes I, I have a dream where I didn't get any promotion, you know? Now, later- That's all, that's over. I have sometimes, I found out, I had all these dreams of suddenly you woke up and crying because you thought something was happening in the desert or something. But that is not basically no more. Did you dream a lot during that time? Sorry? Are these dreams that you dreamed during that time? Or is it after? I think it was the one, I think, I have no idea. You have no idea? I don't remember. I think, no. There was so much going, so much involved- Mm-hmm. ... that I'm sorry I don't remember.So much trash. (coughs) And you were, and you were very obsessed with it. You threw it away. Hmm. So only af- after the war did you dream about being in battle or imagining too much? Yeah. Um, mm, yes, also, uh, also sometimes dreaming up all these problems we had back there. Like what? Like when? That was a long time ago. Mm-hmm. It's hard for me to...12, 10 years after the war. Oh, God. I'm trying to remember. But nowadays? No. Hmm. Um, now, when you look back at, uh, you know, what happened and what, how you were involved with the bomb plot you were talking about everything, um, do you ever feel guilty about what took place or what happened during that time and what you were involved with? About the bombing? No. During, during the war, the bombs, anything in this, these times, do you ever feel guilty about something? I felt more guilty about trying to kill Hitler. Mm-hmm. Because I thought, uh, that was, uh, he was the one, he wanted to kill everyone. Mm-hmm. And I was not bound by the oath because he broke the oath, not I. (coughs) He latched the oath on us, which is a public crime because then you have no troops. And I did not want to be responsible. No. Well, what, what you, uh, what, what you said guilty about what happened, uh, I think I would feel worse. Mm-hmm. But I didn't feel guilty. Mm-hmm. Now, did you try- Because I had the responsibility to blow up the whole world. Did you, did you try, after the bomb plot, did you try any more, uh, any more times to try to- No, no, no. Blow up the Nazis? Uh, uh, uh, there was only, uh, special ones who survived. Hmm. They escaped, uh, through the rafters. (coughs) I knew that, but don't know how. Yes, but I thought that we would have success in blowing them up so they'd leave and go fly high in space, but now that's all right. Hmm. Since they put their feet up on this, we feel better about probably two or three million less people killed. Hmm. Now, during this time, uh, because of what happened, did you lose, did you find it hard to trust people nowadays with, uh, what happened during that time? Uh, uh, what happened during that time? With all your World War II experiences. Uh-huh. Um, because of these experiences, uh, do you find it hard nowadays and after the war to trust people? Did you lose trust in people? No. No. Because I, uh, now I would say that politicians everywhere are normally criminals. (coughs) But you don't think that's going to- I don't know anyone that doesn't like to trust people. Mm-hmm. I don't keep trusting people. Mm-hmm. Now, during World War II, did you have that same opinion with people around you? About the people in my own unit, yes, I trusted them. Mm-hmm. But, uh, naturally you had to be careful. You couldn't trust everybody. Mm-hmm. You couldn't, you wouldn't... You would then be in danger if you had some trust with somebody who was from this country that you wanted to kill. Mm-hmm. So here is where you have to make great judgments on whom you could trust and whom you could not trust. And how could you make that decision? Well, it was dangerous if you, if you trusted someone then you, uh, in danger of your life. Mm-hmm. The life of your family. Mm-hmm. (coughs) Plus, uh, well, there were some times, yes, there, uh, there was one lieutenant who had a conversation with an officer. Mm-hmm. Then it was, uh, it became dangerous because they asked, he just addressed the ABC of, uh, Germany and his words- Mm-hmm. ... he wasn't from this country yet. He might have reported me. Mm-hmm. I see. Now, did you ever, during this time, question whether life was, was worth living or not? What? Did you become fatalistic at all during this time? Well, you see, uh, I, first, yeah, I didn't think that I, I thought sooner or later I'll probably, I will be killed at the end of the war. Mm-hmm. I was, therefore I became somewhat fatalistic. Mm-hmm. (coughs) But every, every officer had to, to, uh, put that into consideration. Mm-hmm. You risk your life. Mm-hmm. Now, during this time, did you ever cry? Sorry? Did you ever cry during this time? Well, yes. When we saw people dying or being, uh, so wounded that they suffered immensely. Mm-hmm. For example, what happened? We couldn't help them. Mm-hmm. Did you have a close friend dead? Well, naturally. Uh, I mean, how could I not feel bad for him? My friend, uh, he lived next to us. Well, I mean, next to us down the hall. And also, sometimes it happens, uh, (coughs) just not always next to you. Mm-hmm. But then if you live next to you, you become fairly... Sometimes I would excuse me because I, I can't support it. Uh, that's all I can say about it. Did you ever have to shoot someone? No. I couldn't do that. Even if they were pleading to be killed? Huh? Even if they were pleading to be killed, if they were asking you to kill them? I couldn't do that. You couldn't do that. Why? That was against military law? Huh? That was against military law? No, that was against, uh, law. That's why I couldn't do it. Whether or not it's against military law or not, that's not my profession. I wasn't, uh, if even now if somebody is telling me I'm suffering, I wouldn't-... did this a lot, my, my, my religious and my moral convictions. Mm-hmm. Um, did, do you ever cry now about what happened back then? No. Hmm. Now, during the- Well, nearly, sometimes, it was something they were doing. (coughs) If a person died or if he was injured or passed off or anything like that, we had to shield him under our lives. Mm-hmm. We had to protect all that. Mm-hmm. Did you ever feel jinxed, uh, during this time? Did you ever feel that, um, you were threatened by forces beyond your control, that you didn't have control on the situations at hand? Did you feel powerless a lot of the time? Yes, definitely, yes. Uh, during the war, we were powerless. Hmm. You could, sometimes you could, you self, you defend, decide your destiny, but anyway. Hmm. How would you describe the perfect soldier? Who overcomes his fear. I think there are very few people who don't know, uh, fear. Very few, you have to overcome also. Mm-hmm. Sometimes I have the impression that one or two people I knew, they had no fear, perhaps because they were already... They knew what they were doing. They had a certain feeling. Mm-hmm. (coughs) And you overcome your fear? Huh? Do you think you overcame your fear? Yes, you have to do it. So, you became, quote/unquote, "The perfect soldier?" Uh, that, I can't say that, really. You'd have to ask my supervisor, see what he says. Mm-hmm. Now, could you briefly describe when you engaged in battle- Right. ... and when you led your men into battle- Right. ... how did you organize them? What was your role in the fighting and how did you command the situation? Well, in the Polish War, I was with a company. Mm-hmm. They just said to do this. Mm-hmm. So, there was no type of formation that you engaged in, just the men, the men ran up to the front? And- No, I, I was, uh, uh, I was captured already when we were there, you see. They told me it was the time. Yes, and then, and then I think everybody become certain to, uh, to fire. Mm-hmm. You need it because you have to kill. Mm-hmm. You have to, you have to tell the people lay down. Mm-hmm. To protect themselves. Mm-hmm. (coughs) I think they have to do that so... Mm-hmm. So, what happened is you would lead your men up to the battle, and then when the fire, uh, from the enemy became intense, everyone started laying down and taking up positions? Yeah. And that's how... And what type of weapons were you armed with? Did you have the ma- machine gun pistol or...? Oh, no, we had at that time, at the beginning we had- The Gukvan? ... uh, we had... Yeah. Mm-hmm. And did you ever change over to the machine gun later, the M34, MG34 or? No, no, no, no. I never got a, a real chance to. Only staff work, right out of the war. Yeah. Mm-hmm. And how were the combat, uh, effectiveness of the, um, the volunteers, the Russian volunteers, uh, compared to the German soldiers? Very different, yeah. Mm-hmm. We had, you see, we had, uh, we had about 800,000, uh, uh, former Soviet, uh, soldiers in the German Army. Some they incorporated in German divisions. Mm-hmm. So, the German division of each was formed had only 50% Russians, uh, uh, people who were soldiers from the former Soviet Union. Mm-hmm. And, uh, we... Well, it was quite interesting then many of these divisions were transferred to France. And when Hitler wanted to give the order that when the Russian soldiers be taken out and sent to work, but then the division commander said, "No, no, they are very good soldiers. We don't know what we get instead of them." Mm-hmm. So, who... That also was mentioned to us, but we knew that, uh, we needed more soldiers. Mm-hmm. And that's when we, we... The national units, their fighting quality was different. Mm-hmm. And naturally, it became lower when, uh, the war turned out to be, uh, less successful than- Yeah. You see, at the beginning, we thought we would come better through this conflict. Mm-hmm. But later on, we realized we didn't. Mm-hmm. It became obvious. Now, you question your book that it was absurd the policies under Koch and Rosenberg in, in Russia. Uh-huh. Um, and that if they had changed their policies, the war probably would have been won in Russia. Well, that, that was actually the theory, but we were beaten by many parts of the population that liberated. Mm-hmm. And when we threw them back into the arms of Hitler, what power? Mm-hmm. It was, well, it was poor policy really. If you wanted, if you wanted the war to be lost- Right. ... if you wanted Germany to lose, why did you and Claustrer and many others push so hard to incorporate Russians into the German army in order to win? You said, "Oh, wait, we're gonna win this war." Because we, we are here after Adolf Hitler. Uh-huh. But they're- But, but to win the war, to get rid of Hitler, but to win the war in Russia.Well, uh, you know, probably (car horn honks) for the international Americans, there was (car horn honks) two things, that we had been able to end the war with the Russians. I wonder- ... and Russia. Hmm. Uh, uh, did you want to beat the Russians? I mean, you were pushing- No, it wasn't... In my opinion, it was absolutely impossible to beat the Russians. Then why were you, why were you pushing so hard to have Russians in the military? Yeah, because, because that's when I think they saw the ability to overthrow, uh, Stalin. Hmm. To mobilize, to put all your will in the world together with Russia. Mm-hmm. I said it was more often, but, uh, uh, I think '42, I said it very clearly. I said we can't lose this war. This is an illegal war. We have to turn the war into a civil war. And so, at that moment, the only possible way was if we killed Stalin and dethroned him. Because Hitler was not to blame. If Hitler, if Hitler changed his mind- (coughs) ... and stopped to kill the Jews, uh, uh, uh, stopped to, to, to, to create the, uh, the Russians ourselves, but that was something he wouldn't do. And do you think if, uh, Germany had won in Russia that Hitler and the possibility of ousting Hitler from power would've been possible? No. Only... No, no. That didn't... That was... It was impossible to win the war with Hitler getting killed by then. Uh-huh. It was only possible to win the war if we turned it into a civil war. That was the only possibility without Hitler. Hmm. That's what I said, you see? All right. Did you ever feel that you yourself, as a soldier and, um, also as a person who was politically conscious of the events at the time, that you were split? That on one side you wanted Germany to win the war in Russia, but on the other side, you knew that the only way to get Hitler out of power was to lose the war? No, no. Let me put it that way. Uh, in the sense that we could win the war, what we couldn't have, would have been impossible to do, to get rid of Hitler. Right? It would have been, uh, theoretically, we would have been able to, to, to defeat the Communists by uniting with the Russian people. But we didn't do that. Now, why wasn't there more, uh, support from the German Army in Russia to incorporate Russians, to treat them as equals, not Utermenche, as you say in your book? Uh, at the beginning, we were not treated as equals, you see? Hmm.